<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXIII: How Kriemhilda Thought to Avenge Her Injury</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Kriemhilda Thought to Avenge Her Injury</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In great estate of honour, as truly doth appear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They dwelt with one another until the seventh year.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>During this time the king's wife brought forth a son and heir;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat the royal Etzel could ne'er be happier.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She would not be persuaded to be content with aught</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But that the child of Etzel should to the font be brought,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With Christian rites according. Ortlieb they named the boy:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which all through Etzel's country was cause of mickle joy.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whatever noble virtues in Lady Helka lay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To match them dame Kriemhilda aye studied, day by day.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The customs soon were taught her, by Herrat, maid forlorn,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who with a secret longing for Helka still did mourn.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To native folk and strangers she now was widely known:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas said of her, that never did any king's land own</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A better, milder mistress; right sure of this they were.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Such fame she bore in Hunsland until the thirteenth year.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now since she knew for certain that none would her gainsay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>E'en as kings' warriors mostly their princes' wives obey,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And as twelve kings before her were ever seen to come,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She thought on all the sorrows that she had known at home.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She thought, too, of the honours that once in Niblungland</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had been in her possession; and which by Hagen's hand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At time of Siegfried's murder, were wholly done away:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And whether he might ever for that be made to pay.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"It might be, could I bring him by some means to this land."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She dreamt that she was walking, and near her, close at hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Was Giselher, her brother, and in her gentle sleep</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She kissed him very often. He soon had cause to weep!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>I ween some evil devil Kriemhilda did provoke</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That with her brother Gunther her friendship now she broke,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whom she, in full forgiveness, kiss'd on Burgundian soil.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then with hot tears began she once more her robe to spoil</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And ever, late and early, within her heart it wrought</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How, without fault on her part, she had thereto been brought,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That henceforth with a heathen she must in wedlock live;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This bitterness did Hagen and Gunther, too, contrive.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The wish that dwelt within her ne'er let her heart alone;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thought she: " I am so mighty, and such great riches own.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That on my foes in vengeance some ill I may repay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus would I do right gladly to Hagen of Tronje.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"My heart is longing sorely for my dear faithful one:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Might I but get them near me who ill to me have done,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So would I take full vengeance for my beloved's life ;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Scarce can I bide their coming; " so murmur'd Etzel's wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The whole of the king's liegemen held highly in esteem</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The warriors of Kriemhilda: and well it was, I deem.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her treasurer was Eckwart,—good friends thereby he made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor could Kriemhilda's wishes by any be gainsaid,</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now was she ever thinking: " I will beseech the king! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To wit, that of his goodness he would allow this thing,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That unto the Hun-country her kinsmen might be brought</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But no one there discover'd the queen's unholy thought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>It came to pass one night-time, as by the king she lay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>(His arms were cast about her, as was his wont alway,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Loving the noble lady: for she was as his life)</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That of her foes was thinking the fair and noble wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And to the king thus spake she: " My ever dear good lord,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I fain would ask a favour, if thou wouldst such accord:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If I am worthy of it, that thou shouldst let me see</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whether my friends and kinsmen thou lovest verily."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the mighty sovran, and guileless was his mood:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I would have thee believe that, if any grace or good</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Be done unto those warriors, I must thereat be glad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since I by love of woman ne'er better friends have made."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And yet again the queen spake: " To thee it hath been said.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I have high-born kinsmen; and this my grief hath made</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they have never troubled to come to see me here.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I hear the people call me naught else but foreigner."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whereunto answer'd Etzel: " Beloved lady mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If not too far it seemeth, so will I from the Rhine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Bid all unto my kingdom whom thou art fain to see."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When thus she learnt his purpose right glad at heart was she.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She said: " If thou right truly wouldst serve me, master mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So wilt thou send an envoy to Worms beyond the Rhine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I may tell my kinsfolk all that I have in mind.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then many a knight right noble his way to us shall find."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Whenever thou commandest," said he, " it shall be done.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou canst not be so eager thy friends to look upon</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As I of noble Ute the sons to see am fain;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That we are still such strangers hath caused me mickle pain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And if it should content thee, beloved lady mine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So will I send right gladly, unto those friends of thine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My players on the fiddle to the Burgundian land."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To bring the worthy fiddlers straightway he gave command.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They hasten'd very quickly to where King Etzel sat.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke the queen beside him. He told them both, how that</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As envoys they were chosen to Burgundy to fare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For them he bade his people rich raiment to prepare.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For four-and-twenty warriors was new apparel made;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And by the king their errand was also to them said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How Gunther and his people to bring there they should seek.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But fain was Lady Kriemhild apart with them to speak.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said the king most mighty: " Now hark ye what to do!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All that is good and kindly I bid my friends, by you;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If they vouchsafe to journey unto my kingdom here.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ne'er yet have I had knowledge of guests as these so dear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And if they so be minded my will herein to do,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These kinsmen of Kriemhilda, then must they not forego</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To come to us this summer, to keep my wedding-feast;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For much on my wife's kindred my happiness doth rest."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the fiddle-player, the haughty Schwemmelin:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"When will in this your kingdom your wedding-feast begin?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That we to your friends yonder unerringly may say."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then answer made King Etzel: " On next Midsummer-day "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"We'll do as thou dost bid us," made answer Werbelin.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then gave the queen an order that they be brought within</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her private room in secret, to speak with her alone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereof soon many a warrior but sorry comfort won.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To both the envoys spake she: " Well shall it be for you</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If you my will and purpose right faithfully shall do,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And say whate'er I bid you when to my home you go;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In goods I'll make you wealthy, and raiment rich bestow.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"What friends of mine soever ye see and meet with there</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At Worms on the Rhine river, take heed lest ye declare</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ye have ever seen me in melancholy mood:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And bear my greeting unto those heroes bold and good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"To what the king requireth beg them that they agree,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thereby let them make me from all my trouble free.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The Huns may well believe that I have no friends at all.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were I a knight, I'd ever be ready at their call.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And to my noble brother, to Gernot eke say ye</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That in the world is no one I hold more lovingly:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Our best of friends and kinsmen bid him unto this land</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To bring, that so the better we may in honour stand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"To Giselher say also that he must not forget</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That never have I suffer'd by fault of his as yet:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherefore would I right gladly set eyes on him again;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, for the faith he show'd me, to see him here am fain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And also tell my mother what honours now I bear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If Hagen, too, of Tronj shall still be dwelling there</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By whom shall they more fitly be through the country shown?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To him the roads to Hunsland from childhood have been known."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unknowing were the envoys what meaning therein lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That Hagen, knight of Tronje, on no account should stay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Behind the rest in Rhineland. Soon woe for them it made:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With him was many a warrior to cruel death betray'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With message and with letters they were provided now:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To live henceforth in plenty of wealth they had enow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their leave they took of Etzel and of his lady fair.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And clad in rich apparel a goodly sight they were.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
