<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XVII: How Kriemhilda Mourn'd for Her Husband, and How He Was Buried</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Kriemhilda Mourn'd for Her Husband, and How He Was Buried</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then waited they for nightfall, and o'er the Rhine did row:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ne'er to more direful ending could heroes hunting go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The quarry they had slaughter'd mourn'd noble maids and wives:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many goodly warriors paid for it with their lives.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Of arrogance o'erweening the tale ye soon shall hear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And of a fearful vengeance. Then Hagen bade men bear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The body of dead Siegfried, the Niblung lord of late,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And lay it in a chamber wherein Kriemhild did wait.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He had him laid in secret down close beside her door,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she might find him lying when she, as heretofore,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Went forth to matins early, ere daylight had begun;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which duty dame Kriemhilda but seldom left undone.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The wonted bell was ringing, which to the minster bade;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then rose the fair Kriemhilda and waken'd many a maid:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She bade them bring a taper, and fetch her all her gear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then came a chamber-servant who lit on Siegfried there.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In red blood he was lying, and all his garb was wet;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But that it was his master he did not know as yet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Into the room he carried the candle in his hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From him did Dame Kriemhilda some ill news understand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For, as she with her women would to the minster fare,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The chamberlain spake to her: " My lady, stay you there!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right opposite the doorway a murder'd knight doth lie."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat began Kriemhilda to weep unmeasuredly.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Before she knew for certain that 'twas her husband dead,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto her mind recall'd she how Hagen questioned</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In what way he might guard him: then first she was afraid.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>An he were dead, her pleasure was all to sorrow made.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To earth down sank she swooning, and ne'er a word could say:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the hapless fair one men gazed as there she lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The grief of Dame Kriemhilda was past all measuring:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>After her swoon, the chamber did with her wailing ring.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Her people said unto her: " What if it be a guest? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But from her mouth came flowing the blood, by anguish press'd;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake she: "'Tis my husband, my own belov'd Siegfried:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It was Brunhilda's counsel, and Hagen did the deed."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The lady bade them lead her where she her hero found.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With her white hand she lifted his fair head from the ground;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Red as he was with blood-stains, well knew she him again.—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There lay the Niblung hero, so pitifully slain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then in her sorrow cried she, that fair and gentle queen:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Woe on mine evil fortune! Upon thy shield is seen</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No dint of any sword-stroke: thou liest murder'd there.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And wist I who hath done it, of death mote he be ware."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon all her attendants began to wail and weep:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With their beloved lady, their grief indeed was deep</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>About their noble master, of whom they were forlorn.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus heavily had Hagen made good Brunhilda's scorn.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then sorrowfully spake she: " Go hence now, all of ye,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And waken Siegfried's liegemen as quickly as may be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And unto Siegmund also my sorrow must ye tell.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If so be he will help me to mourn brave Siegfried well."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>A messenger ran swiftly and found them where they lay,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Siegfried's own band of heroes from Niblung land were they.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He told the grievous tidings, and joy fled at his word;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet would they not believe it till they the wailing heard.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The messenger sped further to where he found the king.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the noble Siegmund that night no sleep did bring;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His heart within foreboded what happ'd to him, I ween:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How that his dear son living should never more be seen.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>'" Awake, arise, Lord Siegmund! Kriemhilda, my mistress,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hath bidden me to fetch thee; to her a sore distress</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hath happ'd beyond all others, which cuts her to the heart:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thou must help her mourning, for thou in it hast part."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upstarted Siegmund, crying: " What grief hath happened</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the fair Kriemhilda, as thou just now hast said?"</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the herald, weeping, " I cannot it withhold:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! Siegfried hath been murder'd, the Netherlander bold! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the noble Siegmund: " Pray let this jesting be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And of such evil stories, beware, for love of me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The like you tell to no man,—how Siegfried hath been slain:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In such case could I never live happily again."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"If thou wilt not believe me when thou hast heard my tale,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With thine own ears 'tis easy to hear Kriemhilda wail;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For she and all her people are mourning Siegfried dead."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then sore afraid was Siegmund: and sad was he indeed.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Straight from his couch upsprang he, with five score of his men;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They reach'd their hands in search of their weapons long and keen.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ran, grief-stricken, thither to where they heard the cries;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then, too, the thousand warriors of Siegfried bold did rise.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whilst piteously the women were heard to weep and moan,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Some of the men bethought them that raiment they should don:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, scarcely for their trouble could they their senses keep.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And bitter was the anguish that in their hearts lay deep.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Soon came the royal Siegmund to where Kriemhild did stand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He spake: "Woe on the journey that brought us to this land</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who hath thy husband taken, and reft me of my son.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, amidst friends and kinsmen, thus murderously done? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Ah, if I only knew him! " the noble wife did say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"No mercy would I show him, in mind or body aye:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Such evil would I do him, that if his kith and kin</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had not good cause for weeping, 'twould be no fault of mine."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then in his arms did Siegmund the murder'd prince enfold;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat his friends their sorrow so little could withhold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That with their lamentation the palace rang and hall;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And even through Worms city, the sounds of woe did fall.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To none who strove to comfort did Siegfried's wife give heed.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile from out its clothing his body fair they freed;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They washed his wounds with water, and laid him on the bier;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The sorrow of his people right grievous was to hear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then up and spake his warriors the men of Niblung-land:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"With right goodwill shall vengeance be taken at our hand;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Within this very fortress is he who did the deed."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then ran they all for weapons the liegemen of Siegfried.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>These thanes, for valour chosen, each with his shield, were there,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A thousand and one hundred, ready at hand they were</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To follow noble Siegmund. The murder of his son</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He to avenge was eager,—'twas needful to be done.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Nor knew they 'gainst what foemen they had to strive withal,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unless it might be Gunther and his bold liegemen all,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With whom their master Siegfried, did late a-hunting go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda saw them arming, and grievous was her woe.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>However deep her sorrow, and dire as was her need,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet did she for the Niblungs fear with such mighty dread</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Death, by her brother's liegemen, that she would have them stay:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She warn'd them in all kindness, as friends each other may.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thus spake the grief-lorn lady; " My lord Siegmund, what dost</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou think to take in hand now? Thou hast not weigh'd the cost.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Gunther hath so many bold warriors at command,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That all of ye will perish if ye his knights withstand."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With shields already lifted, they needs must to the fray;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble queen besought them and even bade them stay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And seek not for a conflict,—these knights of courage high.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet would they not forego it; which grieved her verily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So said she: " Noble Siegmund, 'twere best to let it be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until a fitter season: then will I readily</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Avenge with you mine husband. Who me hath widow made,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To him, when it is proven, shall evil be repaid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Hereby upon the Rhine-strand dwells many a haughty knight</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I cannot therefore counsel that you with them should fight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Full thirty warriors have they against our every one.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>God grant that they may prosper as they to us have done!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Ye must remain beside me, this grief with me to share;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, when the day is dawning, ye heroes bold prepare</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To help me in his coffin my husband dear to lay."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then all the thanes made answer: " It shall be as you say."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>No tongue could ever tell you the marvel of it, how</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From knights as well as ladies arose the cries of woe,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So that throughout the city the noise thereof did sound.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble burghers heard it, and quickly throng'd around.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They mourned with the strangers, for they themselves were sad.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If fault had been with Siegfried, none told them that it had,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor why the noble warrior had forfeited his life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then wept, too, with the women, each worthy burgher's wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The smiths were bidden quickly a coffin to devise</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of gold y- wrought and silver, strong and of mickle size;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They bade them firmly bind it, with temper'd steel and good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then truly all the people were sorrowful of mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The night was spent, and daylight 'twas said would soon appear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble lady bade them unto the minster bear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Siegfried their noble master, her husband well-beloved.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One saw his friends all weeping, as they the body moved.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They brought him to the minster, and toll'd was many a bell:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On every side the chanting of priests was heard to swell.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thither came King Gunther, and all his folk with him,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To take part in the mourning; and likewise Hagen grim.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He said: " My dearest sister, alas, indeed, for thee!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That from thy sorrow's burden can none of us be free:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We must bewail for ever the loss of Siegfried's life."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"That do ye without reason," answer'd the mourning wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"It never need have happen'd if real your sorrow were;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Me must ye have forgotten,—that may I well aver,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When I was there bereft of my own beloved one.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I would to God," said Kriemhild, " it had to me been done! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They clave unto their lying. Kriemhild began again:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Whoso of you is guiltless, now let him make it plain;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Let each before the people walk up unto the bier;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thereby the truth that 's in him shall presently appear."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>It is a wondrous marvel that oft hath happened:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That when one sees the slayer beside the murder'd dead.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The wounds afresh start bleeding; as here, too, came to pass.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby men saw that Hagen the malefactor was.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Again the wounds bled freely, as they had done afore;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who had mourn'd him sorely bewail'd him now the more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake aloud King Gunther: "I tell you everyone</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas vagabonds that slew him: 'twas not by Hagen done."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"These vagabonds, too surely are known to me," she spake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"By friendly hands, God willing, we'll vengeance on them take!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou Gunther and thou Hagen have surely done this thing."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By this time Siegfried's warriors for strife were hankering.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda spake yet further: "Now share with me my need."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then came those twain unto her who found him lying dead,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They were her brother Gernot and Giselher the youth.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As many a man did later, these mourn'd for him in sooth.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With all their hearts they mourn'd him, the husband of Kriemhild.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now masses must be chanted: the minster soon was fill'd</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With men, and wives, and children,—from every side they came.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>E'en they who little miss'd him mourn'd Siegfried all the same.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Gernot, and Giselher with him, spake: " Sister dear to me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now, for this death, take comfort, as verily must be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We will atone unto you as long as we shall live."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet on the earth was no one who could her comfort give.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>His coffin was made ready wellnigh about mid-day;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then from the bier they raised him, whereon till then he lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fain would the noble lady have kept him from the grave;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which unto her attendants sore trouble surely gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In richly broider'd vestment they wrapp'd the body round,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And then, I ween, that no one unweeping there was found.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With all her heart wept Ute—a noble woman she—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And each of her attendants the goodly corpse to see.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When people heard the chanting within the church begin,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And knew that he was coffin'd, they throng'd to enter in:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For his soul's weal and profit what offerings were made!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In sooth, among the foemen good friends enough he had!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda, the poor lady, said to her chamberlain:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"The love they bear towards me will be to them a bane,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Seeing they grudge him nothing and hold me also dear;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For Siegfried's weal 'tis fitting that they his gold should share.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There was no child so Httle, who any wit might have,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But joined in the almsgiving, ere he was laid in grave.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>More than a hundred masses were sung ere day was done</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Siegfried's friends and kinsmen came thronging ev'ry one.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When ended was the chanting the people went away.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the lady Kriemhild: " Ye must not let me stay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alone to watch beside him, this knight exceeding brave.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My joys are, with his body, all buried in the grave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Three days and three nights longer here would I keep him still,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until of my dear husband my heart has had its fill.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then what if God should order that death should take me too?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then would poor Kriemhild's sorrows no longer trouble you."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The people from the city now homewards went their way.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The priests and monks Kriemhilda besought with her to stay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A.nd eke her own attendants, to watch beside the knight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Forbidding was the darkness and wearisome the light.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>From eating and from drinking did many a man abstain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If any cared to take it, to them it was made plain</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they might have in plenty: Siegmund of that took care.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And yet, full many a labour the Niblung-folk must share:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For three whole days, unceasing,—the story thus we hear—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who had skill in singing must needs the burden bear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of chanting many an office. What alms to them folk paid!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who were poor aforetime now wealth in plenty had.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whene'er they found poor people who nothing had to bring,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They sent them to the minster, with gold for offering</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From Siegfried's treasure taken. Since life he could not have,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of marks for his soul's welfare they many thousand gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The first-fruits were divided in all the land around,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherever cloister-houses or goodly folk were found.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of silver and of raiment the poor got ample store:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Men did the Hke as showing what love to him they bore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the third day early, just at the hour of Mass,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The churchyard wide extending,—that by the minster was,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With country-people's wailing was fill'd from end to end.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In death they did him service, as to a well-loved friend.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In those four days of mourning, indeed, it hath been said,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That marks full thirty-thousand, or even more, were paid</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For sake of his soul's welfare, and given to the poor.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Laid low was all his beauty, his life was now no more.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When God was served duly, and all the chants were sung,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A dreadful cry of sorrow arose from out the throng;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Out of the minster must they now bear him to his grave.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Those who were loth to lose him fresh tears and cries forth gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With cries of lamentation the people follow'd then;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The faces all were joyless of women and of men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ere in his grave they laid him they sang and read withal;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! and the priests were worthy who gave him burial.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Or ever Siegfried's widow had come unto the grave,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her faithful heart with sorrow such bitter strife did have</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they must needs revive her with water from the spring;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her bitterness of sorrow was past all measuring.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>It was a mickle wonder that strength again she found.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With cries of pity, helping, the women throng'd around.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the Queen: " O liegemen of Siegfried, hearken ye!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I pray you of your fealty a favour grant to me,—</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That after all my sorrow this small grace I may gain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And on his goodly features may set my eyes again."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So long did she beseech them, with all her sorrow's strength,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they the splendid coffin must break apart at length.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And then they brought the lady to where her love did lie,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And she his fair head lifted, with white hand tenderly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And in his death she kiss'd him,—the noble knight and good;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her shining eyes, for sorrow, were weeping tears of blood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>It was a piteous parting, if ever there was one.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so away they bore her; she could not go alone,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For in a swoon and senseless that noble wife lay low;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her life, for weal appointed, was wellnigh lost in woe.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When now their noble master within his grave was laid.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unmeasured was the sorrow that all his followers had.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who from the Niblung country had borne him company;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And little joy or gladness in Siegmund was to see.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Amongst them there were many who, for their sorrow's sake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Till those three days were ended nor meat nor drink did take.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet could they not their bodies abandon utterly:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So feasting follow'd sorrow, as evermore will be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
