<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXIX: How He Stood Not Up Before Her</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-29" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How He Stood Not Up Before Her</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>This famous pair of warriors asunder then withdrew,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hagen, the lord of Tronje, and noble Dietrich, too.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereon across his shoulder look'd Gunther's man around</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In hope to see a comrade, whom in a trice he found;</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For there Sir Volker standing by Giselher he saw;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He begg'd that cunning minstrel aside with him to draw,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For well was he acquainted with his unyielding mood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In sooth, he was in all points a warrior bold and good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They left the lords together standing in the courtyard.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas seen how they twain only, and not another, fared</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Across the court wide-stretching before a palace great;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Those chosen men of valour had fear of no man's hate.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They sat upon a settle against the palace front,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hard by a hall which Kriemhild herself to use was wont.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Brightly upon their bodies their noble raiment shone,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And plenty who beheld them would gladly them have known.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Like wild beasts of the forest those haughty heroes then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were gaped upon and gazed at by all the Hunnish men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The wife of Etzel spied them athwart a window-pane:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby the fair Kriemhilda was sorely grieved again.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>It brought to mind her sorrow; she fell to weeping then,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat was mickle marvel among King Etzel's men:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What could have thus so quickly troubled their lady's mood?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She answer'd: " That hath Hagen, ye heroes bold and good."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They spake unto the lady: " How can this thing have been</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When we ourselves but lately have you so happy seen?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>None can have been so hardy such evil to have wrought:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Else bid us to avenge it; his life shall go for naught."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"For ever would I serve him who would my wrongs repay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To give him all he ask'd for I would be ready aye.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon my knees I beg you," so spake the royal wife,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Avenge me now on Hagen, that he may lose his life."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then sixty gallant warriors girded their armour on,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who, for the love of Kriemhild, were keen to set upon</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And make an end of Hagen—the ever valiant one—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And likewise of the minstrel. 'Twas all with forethought done.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But when the queen beheld them, how small a band they made,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In grim and gloomy humour she to the heroes said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Ye must leave unaccomplish'd what ye would take in hand:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, never against Hagen so few will dare to stand!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"How strong and bold soever Hagen of Tronj be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The man who sits beside him is stronger far than he,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Volker, the fiddler, namely; he is an evil wight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These heroes to encounter ye will not find so light."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they had heard this warning still more took heart of grace,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Four hundred gallant warriors. That queen of noble race</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had set her heart upon it to do her foes despite:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whence soon was mickle sorrow made ready for each knight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now when she saw her liegemen with arms and armour clad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the ready warriors the noble lady bade:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Abide ye here a little, ay, stand ye quiet so;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I mean to put my crown on, and to my foemen go.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And hark while I upbraid him for what he did to me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This Hagen, lord of Tronje, King Gunther's knight in fee.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So arrogant I know him, he'll give me not the lie;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke care I as little what he shall get thereby."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then look'd the fiddle-player, the minstrel bold, and lo.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He saw the noble lady along a stairway go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That led down from the palace. And when he that espied,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The ever valiant Volker unto his comrade cried:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now look ye there, friend Hagen, how yonder cometh nigh</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She who into this country hath lured us faithlessly.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With king's wife saw I never so many men around.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Bearing in hand their weapons, as for a battle bound.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Know'st thou, friend Hagen, whether they hatred to thee bear?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If so, I fain would counsel that thou the better care</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Shouldst take of life and honour: ay, that, methinks, were good!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unless I am mistaken, they are in wrathful mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And some there are among them so exceeding broad of breast</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That who would rest in surety hath little time to waste.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ween, beneath their clothing, their hauberks bright they wear;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But whom therewith they threaten I nowise can declare."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake in mood of anger Hagen, the valiant one:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"For me, right well I know it, the whole of this is done,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That thus their unsheath'd weapons they carry in the hand;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet will I, notwithstanding, ride to Burgundian land!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now say if thou, friend Volker, thine aid to me wilt lend,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If so be Kriemhild's liegemen to fight with me intend?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That let me hear you promise, as I am dear to you;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And evermore I'll answer to you with service true."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Ay, surely will I help thee," the gallant minstrel spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Saw I a king come hither, attack on us to make</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With all his warriors round him, so long as I should live</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I would not fail to help thee, and not a foot would give."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Thy service, noble Volker, may God in Heaven requite.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What further can I ask for, if thou by me wilt fight?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since thou art fain to aid me, as I am glad to hear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These blades may come and welcome with all their warlike gear."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now from the seat upstand we," then said the man of song:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"She is a sovereign lady; and let her pass along.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Let us that honour pay her, she is of noble birth.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thereby our own condition shall seem of greater worth."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"For love of me, I pray thee, do it not," Hagen spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Lest otherwise these warriors perchance the deed mistake</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And think that I had risen, through fear, upon my feet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For such as her and her kind I'll never leave my seat!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"For both of us 'twere better, methinks, to let it be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Why should I do her honour who bears such hate to me?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nay, that will I do never as long as I have life;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor care I for the hatred of royal Etzel's wife! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The overweening Hagen across his knees laid down</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A bare and shining weapon, upon whose pommel shone</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A very brilliant jasper, greener than any sward.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda well remember'd that it was Siegfried's sword.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When she that sword remember'd a grief it needs must be;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The hilt of it was golden, its sheath red broidery.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It brought to mind her sorrow; her tears began to fall;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ween the hardy Hagen had therefor done it all.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the bench towards him the valiant Volker drew</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A fiddle-bow, a strong one, and long and mighty, too,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which to a sword had likeness, right keen and broad of blade</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The pair of doughty heroes thus sat there undismay'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The valiant twain so lordly seem'd, in their own conceit.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They did not deem it fitting to stand up from their seat</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For fear of man or woman. Whereon, with foe-like mien,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nigh to their feet, to greet them, came up the noble queen.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She spake: " Now tell me, Hagen, who sent to bid you here,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That riding in our country thou darest to appear?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou, too, who so well knowest what thou hast done to me?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hadst thou been well advised thou best hadst let it be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"No one hath sent to fetch me," Hagen in answer said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"But hither to this country three warriors you bade;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My masters they are called, to them I service owe.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On any royal journey I scarce could fail to go."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Said she: " Now tell me further, how was it thou didst that</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For which thou hast deserved my everlasting hate?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou was it who didst Siegfried, my well-loved husband, slay;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whom I must mourn for ever until my dying day."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He spake: " What boots that further? Of talk we have no need.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I am that self-same Hagen who did to death Siegfried,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The mighty-handed hero. How dearly he repaid</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The flouts which Dame Kriemhilda on fair Brunhilda laid!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"It is not to be doubted, O great and mighty queen,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of all your baleful sorrows that I have guilty been.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now be it man or woman, let them avenge who will;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Though I should then gainsay you, I've done you grievous ill."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Said she: " Now hark ye, warriors, he doth not e'en deny •</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he hath work'd my sorrow! What may befall thereby</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To him, ye men of Etzel, of no account I hold."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then look'd on one another those haughty thanes and bold.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>It doubtless had befallen, whichever had begun</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The strife, that these two comrades the honour would have won;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Seeing how oft in battle they gallantly had fought.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In dread the others shrank from the deed they had in thought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake one of the warriors: " Why look ye so on me?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From what I erewhile promised I would that I were free!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For sake of no one's largesse would I forego my life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! to our ruin go we, led by King Etzel's wife."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whereafter spake another: " To that same thought I hold;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were anyone to give me whole towers of good red gold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'd care not to contend with that fiddler willingly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For dread of the swift glances that in his eyes I see.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Hagen have I known also, and from his early youth:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus little can be told me about that knight, forsooth!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In two-and-twenty battles I've seen him, in the strife;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby hath heartfelt sorrow befallen many a wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"On many a foray went they, he and the Spaniard,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When they were here with Etzel; ofttimes a battle hard</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They fought for the king's honour; and many such befell;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereof one must of Hagen much to his honour tell.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"At that time this same warrior was but a child in years.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who were then but youngsters, how gray are now their hairs!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now he is come to wisdom, a man of ruth is he.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke he wieldeth Balmung, won by foul treachery."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With that the thing was settled,—that none should strike a blow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby the queen was stricken unto the heart with woe.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The heroes all disbanded: fearful lest death indeed</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Be dealt them by the fiddler: in sooth they had good need.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake anon the fiddler: " We have right plainly seen</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That foemen here beset us, as we forewarn'd have been.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now to the court return we and seek the sovrans there:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That no one, then, our masters to meet in strife may dare.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"How oft a man, faint-hearted, will let a chance slip by,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When if a friend beside him upheld him cheerfully</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And with good understanding, he would not do the same.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right many a man by forethought is saved from loss and shame."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Where you go I will follow," Hagen was quick to say;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then back into the courtyard forthwith they took their way,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Where still in grand assembly waited the knightly crowd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And then the valiant Volker began to speak aloud</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And say unto his masters: " How long here will ye stay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To let yourselves be crowded? To court ye should away,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And from the king discover what he in mind may have."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then might one see forgather the heroes good and brave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The prince of Bern, Sir Dietrich, took hold of by the hand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Gunther, the mighty ruler of the Burgundian land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Irnfried was fain with Gernot, that right bold man, to fare,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Riideger went walking to court with Giselher.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Howe'er the rest companion'd, and so to court pass'd on,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Betwixt Volker and Hagen of parting there was none,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Save only in one struggle, which ended their two lives,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And caus'd sad weeping later to many noble wives.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the kings attending one saw to court go then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their nobly-born retainers, a thousand gallant men;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And sixty warriors also along with them had come;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The same that valiant Hagen had brought with him from home.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And Haward eke and Iring, a pair of chosen worth,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By one another walking, went with the sovrans forth.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Dankwart and also Wolf hart, a thane of courage rare;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These well before the others upheld their honour there.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When came the lord of Rhineland within the palace door,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Etzel, the mighty monarch refrained himself no more,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But from his seat upsprang he, seeing him entering,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A better greeting never was given by a king.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Be welcome, my lord Gunther, and you, lord Gernot, too,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Giselher, your brother. My zealous service true,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I have already sent you to Worms beyond the Rhine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all your followers also shall welcome be as mine.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I bid a hearty welcome to you, ye knightly pair.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Volker the right valiant and eke to Hagen there,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From me and from my lady, unto this land of mine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She messengers in plenty hath sent ye to the Rhine."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Hagen of Tronje answered: " So heard I, more than once!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And had I for my masters not come unto the Huns,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet would I you to honour have ridden to this land."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble host then kindly his guests took by the hand;</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And to the seat he brought them where he himself had sat,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then to the guests they offer'd (they busily did that),</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In wide-mouth'd golden goblets, wine, mead and mulberry,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And bade to the newcomers a welcome heartily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the royal Etzel: "I will to you confess</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Naught in this world could give me a greater happiness</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than ye have given me, heroes, in coming thus to me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby the queen is also from mickle grief set free.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And ofttimes have I marvell'd what was the fault in me—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So many guests right noble have I been wont to see—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ye unto my country to come did never deign?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But now that I have seen you to joy is turn'd my pain."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Said Riideger in answer (a knight of noble mood):</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Well may you see them gladly; their faith indeed is good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all my lady's kinsfolk the same can well uphold;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They bring unto your palace full many a warrior bold."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The even of Midsummer, at mighty Etzel's court</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These princes made their entry; and seldom hath report</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Told of such royal welcome as on these chiefs he spent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now was it time for eating; and all to table went.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Amidst his guests more nobly a host ne'er took his seat.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For them there was abundance whereof to drink and eat,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And everything they wanted it was all ready made;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For truly of these heroes great marvels had been said.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
