<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXXV: How Iring Was Slain</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-35" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Iring Was Slain</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon the margrave Iring, who came from Denmark, cried:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I have in all my doings on honour long relied.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And in the people's battles oft gain'd the mastery:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now bring to me my weapons; Hagen I will defy! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"'Gainst that will I take counsel," Hagen in answer cried;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"So bid these Hunnish warriors stand further yet aside;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If two or three among ye should rush into this hall,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Back down the stairs disabled I'll send them, one and all! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"For that I'll not forego it," said Iring, answering,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I have ere this attempted as troublesome a thing.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With sword in hand against thee I'll hold my own alone;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What boots thy haughty bearing that thou in words hast shown? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then quickly in his armour thane Iring was y-clad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With Irnfried of Thuringia, a bold and gallant lad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke the stalwart Haward, with full a thousand men;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whatever part was Iring's, that would they all maintain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The fiddler saw them coming—a very host they were—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In arms along with Iring, to set upon him there.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On head, well-fasten' d, wore they right many a helmet good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then wax'd the gallant Volker wrathful enough in mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now dost thou see, friend Hagen, how Iring yonder goes,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who swore that thee in sword-fight he singly would oppose?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Doth falsehood fit a hero? Him I misprize therefore;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He brings with him in armour a thousand men or more! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now call me not a liar," the liege of Haward said,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I'm ready to accomplish what I have promised;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For fear of no man living will I my word disown;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How dread so e'er be Hagen, I'll stand to him alone."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Iring begg'd his kinsmen and followers, at their feet,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they would let him singly in fight the warrior meet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unwillingly they yielded, for well enough to them</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Was known the haughty Hagen, firom Burgundy who came.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Yet he so long besought them, that 'twas at last agreed.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For when his people saw him so bent upon the deed,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And that he strove for honour, they could but let him go;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon a grim encounter befell betwixt the two.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Iring, the thane of Denmark, aloft his javelin bare</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And held his shield before him, that noble knight and rare;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then up the steps to Hagen before the hall he ran:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Amongst the thanes assembled a fearful din began.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then from their hands the lances they forward hurl'd with might,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right through the strong-bound bucklers upon the harness bright,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So that the broken spear-shafts were whirl'd high in the air.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then clutch'd they at their broadswords that grim and gallant pair.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The strength of doughty Hagen it was a mighty thing.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet Iring's blows upon him made all the house to ring;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From palace and from turret echo'd their strokes again:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet naught avail'd the warrior his will on him to gain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So Iring tum'd from Hagen and left him scatheless yet;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Against the fiddle-player forthwith himself he set.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Him, with his sturdy sword-strokes he thought hemight compel;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But these the well-skill'd chieftain knew how to parry well.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then smote the fiddler sorely, till o'er the buckler's side</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By Volker's hand the plating was scatter 'd far and wide;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So was he fain to leave him, a grewsome man was he;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then Iring rush'd on Gunther, the lord of Burgundy.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And stout enough for combat was either of them made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Howe'er on one another Gunther and Iring laid.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Neither could wound the other to draw a drop of blood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From that their armour saved them, so strong it was and good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Eke Gunther left he standing and on to Gernot ran,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And smote till from his hauberk the sparks to fly began,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And yet the sturdy Gernot, the knight of Burgundy,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So dealt on gallant Iring that he was like to die.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then from this prince he hurried—swift-footed was he too—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And four of the Burgundians the hero quickly slew;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All noble court retainers from Worms-on-Rhine they were.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then wrath could ne'er be greater than that of Giselher.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now, by the Lord! Sir Iring," cried Giselher the lad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"For these thou needs must pay me who lie before thee dead—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By thee this moment slaughter'd; " then ran on him straight-way</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And smote the knight of Denmark so that he needs must stay.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Beneath his hands succumbing down fell he in the blood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all were well persuaded that now the hero good</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ne'er more would wield a weapon in battle anywhere:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet Iring lay unwounded in front of Giselher.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>From blows upon the helmet and clashing of the sword</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His wits were sorely stricken and scatter'd all abroad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So that the gallant warrior of life took no more thought:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This by his strength of body bold Giselher had wrought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When from his head the numbness at last began to go,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which had erstwhile come on him from that o'erwhelming blow,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thought he: "I still am living, nor wounded anywhere;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now know I for the first time the strength of Giselher."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>On one side and the other his enemies heard he;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were they his case aware of the worse for him 'twould be;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And likewise had he noted that Giselher was by:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He ponder'd how 'twas likely he might these foemen fly.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>How madly then upsprang he from out that bloody stew!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto his ready fleetness his thanks were surely due.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Out of the place forth rush'd he, but there saw Hagen stand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And smote upon him swiftly with all his might of hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then to himself thought Hagen: " Death thee for this must have!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unless the devil help thee, thyself thou canst not save."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet Iring through the helmet a wound on Hagen made:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This did the knight with Vaske, that was so good a blade.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>No sooner felt Sir Hagen the smarting of the wound</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than terribly his weapon he whirl'd in hand around.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Forthwith must Haward's liegeman for safety flee again,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Hagen down the stairway to follow him was fain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Above his head bold Iring his shield made haste to lean;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And if that self-same stairway yet thrice its length had been,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hagen had ne'er allow'd him to deal a single stroke.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay me! the sparks so ruddy that from his helmet broke!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Yet back unto his people Iring in safety won.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then soon unto Kriemhilda the tidings were made known</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How he had wrought in battle on Hagen of Tronje;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For which her thanks right hearty the queen began to say:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now God reward thee, Iring, a hero good thou art;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Much hast thou me encouraged and comforted my heart.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Lo, now on Hagen's raiment all red with blood I look! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With her own hand Kriemhilda his shield, in kindness, took.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"So much you need not thank him," quoth Hagen; "if again</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With me he'd try his fortune, it would beseem the thane.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If ever thence return'd he, a valiant man he'd be!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The wound will serve you little that he hath given to me.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That you have seen my hauberk by blood of mine made red,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the death of many hath me embittered.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Against that liege of Haward's I have the utmost wrath;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Albeit the warrior Iring hath done me little scathe."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile the man of Denmark into the wind had gone</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To cool him in his hauberk—his helmet off was done.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all the folk were saying his prowess was right good;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby they made the margrave exceeding bold of mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then presently spake Iring: " My friends, now mark ye well</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ye must arm me quickly: I'll try another spell,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If that o'erbearing tyrant I yet may bring to book."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His shield was hack'd to pieces: a better one he took.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Full speedily the warrior was better arm'd than e'er;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A javelin right sturdy with hate in heart he bare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherewith once more with Hagen he purposed there to fight;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With foe-like mien awaited for him that murderous wight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But brook'd not the thane Hagen to stay for his advance;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He ran full speed towards him, with blows of sword and lance,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until he reach'd the stairs' foot, his wrath was fierce and dread,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all the strength of Iring stood him in little stead.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They slash'd right through the bucklers, till each of them began</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With ruddy fire to sparkle. And ere long Haward's man</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By the broadsword of Hagen was desperately smit</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Through shield and armour: never mote he get well of it.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When that the chieftain Iring was of the wound aware,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His shield unto his helm-band he raised, to rest it there.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He thought that with this damage he now had got his fill:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The liegeman of King Gunther had more to give him still.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Before his feet did Hagen a javelin espy;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And with it straight at Iring, the Danish chief, let fly,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So well, that from his forehead the shaft thereof stuck out.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For him the warrior Hagen a cruel end had wrought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Iring must needs betake him the Danish folk unto;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But ere they loosed the helmet from off the chief, they drew</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Out from his head the lance-shaft; then death to him came nigh.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His kinsfolk all were wailing: well might they, verily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then came the queen towards him, and over him she leant,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And for the stalwart Iring gave to her sorrow vent;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She wept, his wounds beholding, and bitter was her grief.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake unto his kinsmen that brave and gallant chief:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I pray thee stint thy weeping, most noble lady mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For what avails thy sorrow? I must my life resign</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Because of wounds and damage that have been dealt on me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No more will death allow me Etzel to serve and thee."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then unto the Thuringians and to the Danes he spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"The gifts that ye were promised no hand of yours shall take</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From yonder royal lady,—her ruddy gold so bright!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Death's visage must ye look on, if ye with Hagen fight."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>All pallid was his colour, the seal of death he bore,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The ever-valiant Iring,—to them 'twas sorrow sore.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For Haward's gallant liegeman there was no hope of life:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so the men of Denmark must forward go to strife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Irnfried as well as Haward sprang forth the hall before</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With warriors a thousand; a horrible uproar</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On every side resounded, mighty and clamouring.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ah, at the Burgundians what lances sharp they fling!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And then the gallant Irnfried straight for the minstrel made,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At whose right hand redoubted great injury he had.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For lo, the noble fiddler the landgrave sore did smite</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Through firmly-fasten'd helmet: he was a grewsome wight!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And thereupon Sir Irnfried the valiant minstrel smote</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Till rents perforce were riven across his ring-wrought coat,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all his breast-plate quiver'd with sparks of fiery red;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Albeit fell the landgrave before the fiddler dead.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Anon were met together Haward and Hagen bold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I wot that whoso saw them a marvel might behold!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From hand of either hero the sword-strokes follow'd free;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Foredoom'd to die was Haward by him of Burgundy.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When Danesmen and Thuringians their leaders saw in death,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then rose a frightful struggle the palace walls beneath,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Or ever they the gateway by might and main had won:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Full many a shield and helmet were shattered and fordone.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Give way!" then shouted Volker, "and let them all come through—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What they would fain accomplish they can in nowise do.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In but a short time after they're bound to die within,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And what the queen hath promised by dying they can win."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now when these haughty chieftains within the chamber went,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of many a one amongst them the head was lowly bent,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For by their rapid sword-blows to perish he was fain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Well fought the gallant Gernot, and Giselher the thane.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There got within the palace a thousand men and four;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One saw their flashing falchions as through the air they tore.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of all who came within it soon every warrior fell.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One might of the Burgundians full many a marvel tell.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereafter was a silence, and all the uproar died.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>While, out of hole and crevice, blood flow'd on every side</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ran into the gutters from all the corpses there.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus had the men of Rhineland wrought by their prowess rare.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then sat they down to rest them, those men of Burgundy,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their weapons and their bucklers they presently laid by.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet still the gallant fiddler before the palace stay'd,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In case that any other to fight with him essay'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king lamented sorely, as likewise did his wife:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And maids and matrons also aweary were of life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ween that Death had taken an oath to do them ill:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whence, by the guests to perish were many warriors still.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
