<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XI: How Siegfried Went Home With His Wife</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Siegfried Went Home With His Wife</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>690</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now that the guests departing all on their way were sped,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Siegfried the son of Siegmund unto his people said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"We likewise must make ready home to our land to go."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Well liked his wife these tidings, when she the news did know.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She spake unto her husband: " When must we needs set out?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I should go thus quickly I very much misdoubt;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For firstly must my brothers with me the kingdom share."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas irksome unto Siegfried from Kriemhild this to hear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The princes went unto him and spake to him, all three:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Now be assured, Sir Siegfried, that yours shall ever be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Our true and faithful service, ay, even unto death! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He bowed unto the princes who pledged him thus their faith.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"We would with you share also," said Giselher the young,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"The lands and eke the castles which unto us belong.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whate'er of this wide kingdom be subject to our rule.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Together with Kriemhilda, that shall you share in full."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon the son of Siegmund said to the princes three,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As soon as of these nobles the goodwill he did see:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Your heritage, God grant it for ever blessed be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke the folk within it! But, for my dear wife, she</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Gladly foregoes the portion that ye to her would give.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A crown she'll soon be wearing, and, if we both should live.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She'll be, in sooth, far richer than any living bride.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In aught else at your service I'll loyally abide."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the lady Kriemhfld: " Though naught my land you deem,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Burgundian thanes should never stand in such small esteem!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To lead them to his country right glad a king might be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! let my own dear brothers e'en share in all with me."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the noble Gernot: " Take whom thou hast a mind;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of those who would ride with thee, thou here wilt plenty find!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of thirty hundred warriors a thousand we'll give thee</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To be thine own attendants." Then Kriemhild speedily</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For Hagen sent, of Tronj, and likewise for Ortwein:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Will ye and eke your kinsmen," she asked, " be men of mine?"</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But Hagen, when he heard it, cried in a mood of wrath:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Nay, Gunther may not give us to anyone on earth!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Let others of your household attend you on your way,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Well might you know by this time the customs of Tronj</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the king attending at court we choose to stay,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whom we thus far have folio w'd, we still would serve alway,"</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas therefore so decided: to start they did prepare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As noble court-attendants Dame Kriemhild took with her</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of maidens two-and-thirty, besides five hundred men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sir Eckewart, the Margrave, went with Kriemhilda then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then was a great leave-taking, of squire as well as knight,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of maiden and of matron: as was indeed but right.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Friend kissing friend at parting was seen on every hand:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right gaily they departed from out King Gunther's land.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Their kinsmen did escort them far out uppn the way.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And camping-grounds were fix'd on, where they the night should stay,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherever seem'd good to them throughout the kings' domain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Swift messengers to Siegmund the tidings bear amain</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>That he and Dame Sieglinda, might straight be made aware</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How that their son was coming, with Ute's daughter fair,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The beauteous Kriemhilda, of Worms on the Rhine-strand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No dearer news and better could e'er have come to hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Ah, well for me," quoth Siegmund, " that I this day have known</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When beauteous Kriemhilda comes hither for a crown!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Mine heritage I reckon thereby a worthier thing:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My son, the noble Siegfried, shall here himself be king."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then gave the Lady Sieglind much velvet of red hue,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And weighty gold and silver, that was their herald's due;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So much the news rejoiced her which she had heard that day.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With zeal her waiting-maidens now donn'd their best array.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Folks talk'd of who was coming with Siegfried to their land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They bade men raise a platform, with benches close at hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherefrom his friends might see him as with his crown he rode.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Siegmund's men went forward to meet him on the road.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>If any better welcome to heroes aye befell</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than in this land of Siegmund, it is not mine to tell.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To meet the fair Kriemhilda Sieglind herself did ride,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With many a lovely lady and gallant knights beside.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>After a whole day's journey at length the guests they spied.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Both native-born and strangers did weary of the ride,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before they reached a fortress,—a castle large and strong,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas Santen hight; and therein they wore their crowns erelong.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With smiling lips and loving, Sieglind and Siegmund too</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Greeted the fair Kriemhilda, with kisses not a few;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They did the like to Siegfried; now gone was all their pain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their followers did likewise a hearty welcome gain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They bade the guests be taken in front of Siegmund's hall.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And there the beauteous maidens were holpen, one and all,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To dismount from their palfreys; and there was many a man</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who on these lovely women to wait with zeal began.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>How grand soe'er the wedding had been upon the Rhine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Here did they give the heroes apparel far more fine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than they, in all their lifetime, had ever worn before.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One might tell mickle marvels of all their wealth in store.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They sate in state and splendour, and had of all enough.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What raiment wore their servants of golden-colour'd stuff!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With broider'd lace adorned, and precious stones inwrought!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble Queen Sieglinda of this had taken thought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Before his friends and kinsmen then noble Siegmund spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I charge all Siegfried's kinsfolk notice hereby to take,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he, before these warriors, my crown henceforth shall wear."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This news the Netherlanders were glad in sooth to hear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To him he gave his kingdom, his crown, and government.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Henceforth he was their master. And his arbitrament</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And rendering of justice became abiding law;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So that fair Kriemhild's husband was greatly held in awe.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In this estate of honour, he lived, as all declare,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And wore the crown and govern'd,—until, in the tenth year.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His comely wife in safety brought forth her first-born son;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat the royal kinsfolk were gladden'd ev'ryone.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They hasten'd to baptize him, and gave him for a name.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>After his uncle, Gunther, which could not bring him shame.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were he but as his forbears, a brave man he would grow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They gave him careful training, as bounden so to do.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>About the self-same season Dame Sieglind pass'd away.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then noble Ute's daughter did over all hold sway,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As doth beseem such ladies who wealth and lands possess.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That Death the queen had taken they mourned none the less.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now yonder too, in Rhineland,—so doth the story run,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the wealthy Gunther there had been born a son</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of beauteous Brunhilda, in realm of Burgundy;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, for the love of Siegfried, that hero's name had he.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With what great care unceasing that child was watch'd and taught!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For him the noble Gunther caused teachers to be sought,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To rear him in all virtues befitting man's estate.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alas! how in his kinsfolk he found an evil fate!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In legends old, the story hath many a time been told,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of how those gallant warriors lived in the days of old;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Worthy of praise, at all times, in good King Siegmund's land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The like did also Gunther and all his knightly band.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The kingdom of the Niblungs was under Siegfried's sway—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Among his wealthy kinsfolk there was no wealthier aye—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Schilbung's warriors also, and all their goods and gold.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Well might the gallant warrior his head more highly hold.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The greatest of all treasures that ever hero won,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Save they that erst-time held it, the gallant knight did own;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which once upon a mountain he wrested by his might;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He did to death to gain it full many a doughty knight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He had his fill of honour; and had it not been so,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In justice to the hero one needs must own, I trow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he among the best was that e'er on horseback sat;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Men fear'd his strength of body; with reason did they that.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
