<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXXIX: How Gunther and Hagen and Kriemhilda Were Slain</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-39" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Gunther and Hagen and Kriemhilda Were Slain</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then for himself Lord Dietrich sought out a suit to wear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Master Hildebrand help'd him to don his fighting gear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So sore was the lamenting made by the stalwart man.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That all the house to echo with his loud voice began.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But quickly he recover'd a fitting hero's mood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And grimly was his armour donn'd by that warrior good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A shield compact right firmly he carried in his hand;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then straightway forth he sallied with Master Hildebrand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Spake Hagen, lord of Tronje: " I see there, drawing nigh,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble warrior Dietrich; for that great injury</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That here hath him befallen, he will upon us set.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This day 'twill be discover'd who doth the honours get.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Ay! to himself Lord Dietrich of Bern doth think that ne'er</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His like, so strong of body and terrible there were!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And should he for our doings a reckoning demand,"</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So Hagen spake: " against him I dare right well to stand."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They heard the words of Hagen,—Dietrich and Hildebrand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He came to where the warriors had taken both their stand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Without the house, together, leaning against the hall.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His goodly shield had Dietrich upon its rim let fall.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Dietrich spake in answer, grievously sorrowing:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Why hast thou done in this wise, O Gunther, mighty king,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To me who am a stranger? to thee what had I done?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All comfort that was left me is now for ever gone.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"With that great deed of vengeance ye were not yet content</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When Rudeger the hero to bloody death you sent:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now have ye taken from me my liegemen everyone;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ah! never to your heroes would I such scathe have done.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now of yourselves be mindful, and of your own distress.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The death of friends and kinsfolk, your toil and weariness;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Doth it not weigh upon you, good warriors, heavily?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alas, the death of Rudeger is bitterness to me!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"In this world never happen'd such woe to anyone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ye took but ill account of my sorrow and your own;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By you of all its pleasures my life henceforth is shorn;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In truth I cannot ever my kinsfolk cease to mourn."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"In sooth," then answer'd Hagen, " So guilty are we not;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For verily your heroes came marching to this spot</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Well-arm'd, for some set purpose, in such large company:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To you methinks the story was not told truthfully."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Vv iat else should I believe then? 'twas said by Hildebrand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That when my knights besought you—the men of Amelungland—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thai; you would give them Rudeger from out the palace-hall.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Naught else but jibes you offer'd to these bold heroes all."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the king of Rhineland: " They did their wish avow</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hence Rudeger to carry; that would I not allow,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To do despite to Etzel, and not to cross your men:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Till Wolfhart words unhandsome began to utter then."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then answer'd him the hero of Bern, " So let it be!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet Gunther, noble sovran, now of thy courtesy</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Repay me for the sorrow that of thy doing came.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And make, bold knight, atonement, that I confirm the same.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Give up thyself as hostage, thou and thy liegeman there;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then I myself will guard ye with all my greatest care,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Lest any of the Hunfolk should do ye aught of ill;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In me thou shalt find nothing save faith and all goodwill."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But Hagen spake in answer: " Now God in Heaven forfend</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That any pair of warriors themselves to thee should bend,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who arm'd as yet so stoutly here stand before thine eyes,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And still are all unfetter'd to face their enemies."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Beware, Gunther and Hagen," then Dietrich answer made,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"How ye refuse my offer! ye twain on me have laid</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So sore a load of sorrow—on heart and spirit too;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If ye amends will make me, that may ye cheaply do.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>I give you my true promise, and pledge it with my hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I myself will with you ride home unto your land;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll guide you in all honour, or will myself be slain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And will, the while I serve you, forget my bitter pain."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now think thereon no longer," Hagen in answer bade,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"'Twere not a fitting story about us to be said.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That two such doughty warriors had bow'd to your demand:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One sees beside you standing no one save Hildebrand."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then upspake Master Hildebrand: " Sir Hagen, God doth know,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Seeing that one hath offer'd to make a peace with you,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The hour is nigh when fitly the offer you might take:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The peace my lord proposes 'twere well for you to make."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>rd sooner make atonement," in answer Hagen said,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Ere in such coward fashion from any place I fled</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As thou hast done but lately, good Master Hildebrand!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Methought against a foeman thou couldst more boldly stanc.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Old Hildebrand made answer: " Why taunt'st thou me therefor?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who sat upon his buckler the Vaske-rock before.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>While friends of his so many the Spanish Walther slew?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>About thyself in plenty are things that one might shew."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the noble Dietrich: " It fits not heroes good</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To rail at one another as any old wives would.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>You, Hildebrand, forbid I to wrangle any more:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On me, a homeless warrior, are weighing troubles sore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Come let us hear, Sir Hagen," to him spake Dietrich then,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"What was it ye were saying, ye ready warriors twain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When first ye saw me coming to you in armour dight?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ye vow'd that ye against me would singly stand in fight."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That no man will deny you," thane Hagen made reply,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"And with some sturdy sword-strokes here fam am I to try,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unless the blade of Niblung within my hand should break:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wroth am I that you purpose us two in pledge to take."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When Dietrich thus had hearken'd to savage Hagen's mood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Quickly his shield uplifted that gallant thane and good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How swiftly Hagen toward him down from the stairway sprang!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The goodly sword of Niblung loudly on Dietrich rang.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then well the noble Dietrich knew that the valiant man</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right ruthless was in humour. The lord of Bern began</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Against this deadly onset to guard himself aright;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To him well known was Hagen, that all-accomplish'd knight</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Dread, too, had he of Balmung, a potent sword enow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From time to time yet Dietrich gave back a wily blow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until at last, in fighting, Hagen o'ermaster'd he:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A single wound he dealt him; 'twas deep and long to see.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Bethought him then Lord Dietrich: " Thou'rt weaken'd by the strife,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I should have little honour were I to take thy life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sooner will I make trial, if I may thee compel</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To be to me a hostage." With trouble this befell.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He let his shield fall downwards—great was his strength of limb,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Tronian Hagen clasp'd he close in his arms to him.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thus was captive taken by him that gallant man;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat the noble Gunther sorely to grieve began.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Dietrich led forth Hagen, fast bound, to where her stand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble queen had taken; and gave into her hand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The boldest of all warriors that ever weapon bare;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then had she joy in plenty for all her bitter care.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For thanks the wife of Etzel unto the thane bent low:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"In heart and eke in body for ever blest be thou!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now hast thou well repaid me for my unhappy lot;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For this I'll ever serve thee if death prevent me not."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then answer'd the Lord Dietrich: " His life thou e'en must spare,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>O noble queen! Then haply thou mayst become aware</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How well he will atone for all he hath done to thee!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He must no whit be worsen'd, that him in bonds ye see."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She bade them carry Hagen to durance vile away,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And there imprison'd straitly unseen of men he lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Gunther the noble sovran aloud began to cry:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Where went that chief of Bern? He hath done me injury."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then presently to meet him the noble Dietrich came.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Great was the might of Gunther, and well 'twas known to fame.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor did he tarry longer;— before the hall he ran.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From their two weapons' meeting a dreadful din began.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Albeit that Lord Dietrich great fame long time had had,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So sore was Gunther's anger he raved like one gone mad;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For deadly foe he held him, so bitter was his pain:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Tis reckon'd still a marvel that Dietrich was not slain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So strong and full of valour was either of the twain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The palace walls and turrets rang with their blows again.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>While on the goodly helmets with swords they hack'd and hew'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then, verily, King Gunther, a royal courage shew'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Yet he of Bern o'ercame him, as likewise he had done</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Hagen; through the hauberk the hero's blood to run</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Was seen, from that sharp weapon wherewith Sir Dietrich clove.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet, weary as was Gunther, he valiantly strove.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Bound was the noble chieftain by Dietrich's hand alone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Although a king should never such bonds have undergone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He thought if he should leave them, the king and vassal, free,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That all on whom they lighted by them fordone must be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Dietrich of Bern then took him a captive, closely-bound,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And by the hand he led him where he Kriemhilda found.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At sight of his affliction her sorrows greatly waned;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She spake: " Be welcome, Gunther, of the Burgundian land!"</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He spake: " I needs must thank thee, most noble sister mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Though I would fain a greeting more gracious have than thine!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>O queen, well do I know thee, how wrathful is thy mood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And that for me and Hagen thou hast no greeting good."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Of Bern then spake the hero: "Never, most noble queen.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Knights of such fair demeanour, your hostages have been</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As these, most gracious lady, whom now to you I give:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>See that ye let the strangers for my sake safely live."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She vow'd to do it gladly: so the Lord Dietrich came—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His eyes with tears o'erflowing—from those two chiefs of fame.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Soon vengeance sore upon them was wreak'd by Etzel's wife:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of both these chosen warriors she took away the life.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Her evil mood obeying, apart she made them lie,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That neither on the other from that time forth set eye,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until in front of Hagen her brother's head she laid.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On both of them Kriemhilda her vengeance well repaid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For first the queen betook her where she might Hagen see:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And spake unto the warrior,—how full of enmity!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"What thou from me hast taken if thou again wilt give,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then home thou yet mayst journey to Burgundy alive."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But Hagen grim made answer: " You throw your words away,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Most noble queen, for truly I've sworn, and now I say</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The treasure I will show not, so long as either one</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Be living of my masters;— I'll yield it up to none."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Then will I end the matter!" so spake the noble wife,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And forthwith bade her liegemen to take her brother's life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They struck his head from off him, which by the hair she bore</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before the Tronian hero; then was his grief full sore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For when, with sorrow stricken, he saw his master's head.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon unto Kriemhilda the warrior spake and said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"E'en as thou saidst, the matter thou hast to ending brought,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And likewise all hath happen'd as I beforehand thought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And now the noble sovran of Burgundy is not.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor Giselher the stripling, and eke the Lord Gernot,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>None knoweth of the treasure save God and me alone:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And unto thee, she-devil, it never shall be known! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Said she: " An evil guerdon dost thou to me award;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet in mine own possession I will have Siegfried's sword,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which my beloved husband, when last I saw him, bare</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That day when, by your doing, began my heartfelt care."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She drew it from the scabbard—he could not hinder her—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And of his life bethought her to rid that warrior.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With both her hands she swung it, and smote his head right off:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Etzel saw her do it, his grief was sore enough.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The prince cried: " Woe betide me, lo! now, how here is slain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And by a woman's doing, the very noblest thane</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ever came to battle, or ever buckler bore!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Albeit I was his foeman I could not sorrow more I "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Old Hildebrand cried: "Truly she shall no gainer be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she hath dared to slay him! Whate'er befalleth me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Although myself but lately to direst straits he brought,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For this brave Tronian's murder I'll yet have vengeance wrought '</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Hildebrand right wrathful upon Kriemhilda leapt,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And at the queen with broadsword a heavy stroke he swept.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, Hildebrand she dreaded with sore anxiety.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But what could it avail her to shriek thus horribly?</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The bodies of the slaughter'd were lying all around;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And there the noble lady lay mangled on the ground.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Dietrich along with Etzel fell bitterly to weep;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For kinsmen and for lieges they mourn'd in sorrow deep.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There mickle pride and honour in death dishonour'd lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The people all were stricken with pity and dismay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In sorrowing was ended the king's high festival—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As loving ever endeth in sorrow after all.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>I cannot tell you plainiy what later may have been,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Save that in bitter weeping were knights and ladies seen—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And noble liegemen also—for friends beloved laid low.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The story now is ended: this is the Niblungs' woe.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
