<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXII: How Etzel Espoused Kriemhilda</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-22" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Etzel Espoused Kriemhilda</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Until the fourth day dawning at Traisenmauer she stay'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The dust upon the roadways meanwhile was never laid;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It rose, as from some burning, on every side, like smoke,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>While through the Austrian country came riding Etzel's folk.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile to the king also the news was duly brought;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereon his former sorrow soon vanished at the thought</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How royally Kriemhilda across the land did ride.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The king then made him ready to go and meet his bride.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Strange tongues of many races one heard upon that road,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As many gallant warriors in front of Etzel rode;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of Christians and of pagans a host exceeding great;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And when they met the Lady they went in noble state.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Of Russ and Greek came riding a goodly company,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Poles and Wallachs saw one go rushing swiftly by</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon their gallant chargers, that mightfuUy they rode;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And nothing was there lacking of native use and mode.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>From out of the Kief country rode many a warrior bold;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And hordes from wild Petschnegen. These did the custom hold</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of carrying bow and arrow to shoot birds as they flew;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With strength they pull'd the bow-string, and the full shaft's length drew.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There stood upon the Danube, in Austrian land, a town</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The name whereof was Tulna: to her was there made known</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Full many a foreign custom she had not seen before.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By many was she welcomed, who through her suffer'd sore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As guard before King Etzel a company there rode</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of mighty men and merry, courtly and high of mood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of princes four-and-twenty, all great and wealthy men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They came to see their Lady,—naught more they ask'd for then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There also was Duke Ramung, from the Wallachian plain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who with seven hundred horsemen before her sped amain:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Like birds of passage flying, one saw them whirling by.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Prince Gibeche soon follow'd, with stately chivalry.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Hornboge, the aye ready, came with a thousand men,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And from the king's side turn'd him towards his Lady then.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As was their country's custom, they raised a mighty shout.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all the Hunnish kinsmen in swarms came riding out.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Also there came from Denmark Haward the valiant one,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ever-ready Iring, to falseness all unknown;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Irnfried of Thuringia, a goodly man was he!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So welcomed they Kriemhilda, she needs must honour'd be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With their twelve hundred liegemen the host they rode before.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sir Bloedelin came also with thrice a thousand more—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The brother of King Etzel from out of Hungary:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right royally escorted unto the queen rode he.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And last of all King Etzel; and with him Dietrich came</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With all his chosen comrades and many a knight of fame,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right noble and praiseworthy, and valiant and good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat was dame Kriemhilda much lightsomer of mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then, to the princess speaking, the nobler Riideger</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Said: " Lady, I will welcome the mighty sovran here.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And whomsoe'er I bid you to kiss, so do it then:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>You must not give like greeting to all of Etzel's men."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then down from off her palfrey the high-born queen they took;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereon the mighty Etzel no more delay could brook.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He from his steed dismounted with many a bold knight too:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And then one saw him blithely towards Kriemhilda go.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Two rich and mighty princes, as has to us been told,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were standing near the lady her garment's train to hold.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What time the royal Etzel went forward her to meet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble prince with kisses then did she kindly greet.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She raised the veil that screen'd her; her dainty colour glow'd</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Out of its golden setting; and many a knight avow'd</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ne'er could Lady Helka have shown a face more fair.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Etzel's brother, Bloedelin, was standing very near.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Him Riideger the margrave bade her to kiss; and eke</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Gibeche; and Dietrich, who was not far to seek.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A dozen of the warriors were kiss'd by Etzel's bride;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then gave she other greeting to many a knight beside.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now all the while that Etzel did by Kriemhilda stay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The younger men were busy (as such would be to-day)</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With many mighty tiltings; one saw then how they rode;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Both Christian knights and heathen, each following their mode.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>How knightly was the bearing of Dietrich's gallant men!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their javelins and lances went flying forth amain</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>High over shields and bucklers, by good knights' hands address'd,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then shiver'd were the shield-rims of many a German guest.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then was a mighty crashing of breaking lance and spear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The warriors of the country were all assembled there,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As were the king's guests also,—a throng of noble men:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The mighty king was walking with dame Kriemhilda then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They saw hard by them standing a very noble tent;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The plain around was cover'd by many a wooden pent,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Where folk might sit and rest them when work was duly sped;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many beauteous maidens by heroes there were led</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto their royal mistress, as she was sitting there</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the rich chair covers. The margrave right good care</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had taken, so to fit it, that everyone should find</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda's bower delightful: and glad was Etzel's mind.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>What Etzel spake unto her it is not mine to say.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile her small white fingers within his right hand lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In loving fashion sat they, for knightly Riideger</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Would have no secret wooing betwixt the king and her.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Straightway commands were given that all the games be stay'd;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With honour they were ended and all the din allay'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Into the wooden houses the men of Etzel hied;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And folk provided lodging around for far and wide.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The day had reached its ending: they laid them down to sleep</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until the light of morning again began to peep.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then were the steeds bestridden once more, by many a man:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ha, and in Etzel's honour what pastimes then began!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king enjoin'd his Hunsmen to do all honour bade.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto Vienna city their way from Tuln they made;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There, deck'd in fine apparel, full many a dame they fomid;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Etzel's wife these welcomed, as in all honour bound.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In all-suf¥icing plenty whatever they would have</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Was there, already for them. Right many a warrior brave</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With joy the sport awaited. All went to hostelry.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And soon the royal wedding began right merrily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But not for all could lodgings be found within the town.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To such as were not strangers, did Riideger make known</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they must seek out quarters in country places round.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ween there were at all times near dame Kriemhilda found</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Dietrich, the noble warrior, and many another thane.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These, in their work unresting, but little peace mote gain</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Till nothing should be lacking to cheer the strangers' mood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So Riideger and his comrades had rest and pastime good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The marriage was accomplish'd one day in Whitsuntide,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When first the royal Etzel lay by Kriemhilda's side,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Within Vienna's city. So many men, thought she,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At her first husband's bidding, she surely ne'er did see.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To those who had not seen her she made herself well known</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By gifts; yea many among them unto the guests did own:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"We deemed that dame Kriemhilda had little goods or gold,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But here hath she, by giving, wrought marvels manifold."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The merry-making lasted for days full seventeen.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And never was there told of another king, I ween.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whose wedding was more noble: such is to us unknown.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All folk who there were present did new apparel own.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In Netherland, aforetime, thought she, she ne'er had sat</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With such a throng of warriors. I say, moreover, that,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If great was Siegfried's substance, he ne'er had, as his men,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So many noble warriors as stood round Etzel then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Nor was there ever any who at his wedding-tide</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of mantles gave so many, so rich and deep and wide;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor any such good raiment as here there was to don.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In honour of Kriemhilda was all in this wise done.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Their friends and eke the strangers were all alike of mind,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That there had been no sparing in gear of any kind.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whatever any wanted, that presently he had.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yea many a knight through kindness was wellnigh naked made.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Yet days of old in Rhineland she could not quite forget,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Beside her noble husband; and then her eyes grew wet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She did her best to hide it, lest anyone should see.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>After so many a sorrow much honour now had she.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>What others gave in bounty no better was than air</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Compared with Dietrich's giving. Whatever Botlung's heir</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had given him for largesse, that quickly lavish'd he.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Eke Riideger with bounty was marvellously free.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And Bloedelin came also, the prince from Hungary,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And bade men take whatever in many chests might be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of gold and silver pieces: 'twas all to give away.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then saw one the king's heroes keeping high holiday.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The players of King Etzel, Warbel and Swemmelin,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ween that either of them did at the wedding win</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A thousand marks for certain, or maybe even more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What time the fair Kriemhilda her crown by Etzel wore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the eighteenth morning they from Vienna went.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then was in knightly pastime full many a buckler bent,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By lances that were carried in every warrior's hand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Soon came the royal Etzel unto the Hunnish land.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In the old town of Heimburg they rested overnight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By then the throng of people could no one tell aright.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor with what strength of numbers they overspread the ground.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay me, and what fair women they in his country found!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>At Miesenburg the wealthy unto the boats they took.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The stream with men and horses was hidden, as to look</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Not otherwise than dry land; yet ever seem'd to flow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The women, travel-weary, had ease and comfort now.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Together had been fasten'd ships many and right good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they might get no damage from either waves or flood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many a well-made awning thereover did they strain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As if they still beneath them had land and open plain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>At Etzelburg, before them, arrived these tidings then.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat was great rejoicing of women and of men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The ladies of Queen Helka, who erewhile were her care,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Soon many days and happy did with Kriemhilda share.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There stood and waited for her full many a noble maid,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On whom abundant sorrow since Helka's death had weigh'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The daughters of kings seven still there Kriemhilda found,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who were the pride and glory of Etzel's land around.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The maiden lady Herrat, still of them all had care,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Queen Helka's sister's daughter, of many virtues rare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The bride betroth'd of Dietrich, child of a king of fame,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The daughter, too, of Nentwein: to honour great she came.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the guests' arrival she look'd with mood right glad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereto great stores and treasure were also ready made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How later the king feasted—who could it all declare?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And with a queen at no time did Hunsmen better fare.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As with his wife beside him the king rode from the strand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble dame Kriemhilda was given to understand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The name of every lady, the better them to greet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, mightily she bore her sitting in Helka's seat.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To her was faithful service render'd right readily.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherefore the queen divided her gold and jewelry,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her silver and apparel: whatever she did convey</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From over Rhine to Hunsland must all be given away.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Also with suit and service subject to her, from then,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were all of the king's kinsmen, and likewise all his men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Never had Lady Helka enjoy 'd such potent sway;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So must they serve Kriemhilda until her dying day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then stood so high in honour the court and realm around,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That men came there at all times, and chosen pastime found,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To whatsoe'er it might be that each one's heart did lean,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Be it the king's good favour or bounty of the queen.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
