<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXIV: How Werbel and Schwemmel Did Their Errand</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-24" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Werbel and Schwemmel Did Their Errand</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When Etzel to the Rhineland had sent his embassy,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The news thereof right swiftly from land to land did fly:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He greeting gave and bade them, by messengers right fleet,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To come unto his feasting: whence many death did meet.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>From out the Huns' dominions the envoys swiftly went</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To the Burgundian country; for thither were they sent</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Three noble kings to summon, and eke their chivalry,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To come and visit Etzel: so rode they speedily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>First were they on their journey to Bechelaren brought;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The folk there served them gladly. That he might fail in naught</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By them unto the Rhineland sent greeting Riideger,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As also did Gotlinda and eke their daughter dear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Nor did they send them further without a proper meed,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby the men of Etzel made all the better speed.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Ute and her children sent message Riideger,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To say there lived no margrave who meant them kindlier,</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto Brunhilda also a kindly greeting went,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of good faith ever steadfast, and friendliest intent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When they these words had taken, forth would the envoys fare:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That God in Heaven would keep them, was Gotelinda's prayer.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Ere yet the envoys fully had cross'd Bavarian ground,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The ever-ready Werbel the worthy bishop found.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What message for his kinsmen upon the Rhine he told</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thereof I have no knowledge; save that in ruddy gold</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He gave the twain a token before he let them ride.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Quoth Pilgerin the bishop: " And could I at my side</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>See them, so were I happy,—these sister's sons of mine:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Scarce can I come to see them, myself, unto the Rhine."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The ways by which they travell'd o'er land unto the Rhine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I cannot say for certain. Silver and raiment fine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By none from them was stolen: men fear'd their lord's despite—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That king of noble lineage—ay, potent was his might!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In the Burgundian country, to Worms upon the Rhine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Came, after twelve days' riding, Werbel and Schwemmelin.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the king the tidings were told, and to his men,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of foreign envoys coming. Gunther made question then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Quoth he, the Lord of Rhineland: " Who can to us declare</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whence come these foreign riders that through our country fare? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But that was known to no one: till Hagen of Tronje,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As soon as he had seen them, did thus to Gunther say:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Strange news to us is coming that much I will aver.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The fiddle-players of Etzel I have but now seen here.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the Rhine your sister hath sent them, verily;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For sake of both their sovereigns right welcome must they be.'</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile before the palace in full array they rode;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No prince's minstrels ever in nobler fashion show'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The royal court-folk hasten'd to meet them presently:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They bade men take their mantles and found them hostelry.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Their travelling clothes were costly, with work so deftly done</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they might well with honour before the king have gone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet in the same apparel to court they would not go:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who cared for it might have it, the envoys let men know.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Without delay they met with folk who were well content</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To take the clothing gladly; and unto them 'twas sent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thereupon the strangers put on far better gear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As it behoves kings' heralds in full array to wear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So went, when leave was given, to where the monarch sat</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Those followers of Etzel: and all were glad thereat.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With courtesy did Hagen towards the heralds make.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And gave them kindly greeting, for which their thanks they spake.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To learn from them the tidings to questioning he fell,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If Etzel and his lieges were faring all right well?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then answer'd him the minstrel: " Ne'er throve the country more,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor were the folk so happy,—of that thou may'st be sure."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Towards the host then went they. Crowded the palace was;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the guests was offer'd such kindly welcome as</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In foreign kings' dominions is ever given of right.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And there, in Gunther's service, found Werbel many a knight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And graciously King Gunther began to greet them then:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Be both of ye right welcome, ye Hunnish minstrelmen,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And your companions also. Ye are, I understand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sent hither by great Etzel to the Burgundian land?"</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Before the king they bow'd them, and then spake Werbelin:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"To thee his service offers that well-loved lord of mine;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And to this land thy sister Kriemhilda greeting saith.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They send us to you warriors trusting in your good faith."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The mighty prince made answer: "Of this right glad am I.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And tell me how is Etzel," so did the king reply.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"And eke my sister Kriemhild, yonder in Hunnish land? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the fiddle-player: " I'll answer this demand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Of this ye may be certain, that never yet there were</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Two folks who lived together more happy than this pair;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all the knights around them, their kinsfolk and their men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When on this ride we started, right joyous were they then."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Gramercy for the greeting he hath sent me this day,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thank my sister also; since it be as ye say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That all live in contentment, ruler and ruled as well:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For I with some misgiving, ask'd ye the news to tell."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king's two younger brothers had likewise come by now:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For they the news from Hunsland but now had got to know.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Giselher right gladly, for his dear sister's sake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Set eyes upon the envoys and kindly to them spake.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Right welcome must ye heralds be unto me and mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And if ye rode more often hither unto the Rhine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Friends would ye find here always rejoicing ye to see.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That aught should here befall you small peril can there be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"We trust you in all honour," made answer Schwemmelin.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>•' And never can I tell you by any wit of mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How Etzel hath enjoin'd us to greet you lovingly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As hath your noble sister, who there hath honour high.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Of former faith and kindness the queen doth you remind,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And how with heart and body you aye to her inclined.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But to the king's self firstly have we been sent, to pray</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That into Etzel's country ye deign to take your way.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That we thereto should urge ye hath given strict command</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The rich and mighty Etzel, who likewise doth demand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That if ye by your sister would not again be seen,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then would he fain have knowledge of what his fault hath been</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That ye are strangers to him, and to his country, too;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For if the Queen Kriemhilda were all unknown to you,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Still he himself were worthy for you to come to see.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And were this thing to happen, 'twould please him verily."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the royal Gunther: " A week from now being gone,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So will I give you tidings of what conclusion</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My friends and I have come to. Meanwhile for you 'twere best</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To go unto your hostel, and may ye have good rest."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But Werbelin spake further: " If such a thing might be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fain would we have permission my lady first to see—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I mean the mighty Ute—before our rest we seek.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then Giselher the noble in courtly wise did speak:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That no man shall deny you; and if to her ye go,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ye will my mother's pleasure right well accomplish so:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For gladly will she see ye; and for my sister's sake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The Lady Kriemhild namely, you welcome will she make."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So Giselher he brought them to where they found the dame.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With joy she saw the heralds who from the Huns' land came;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And heartily did greet them, so kindly was her mood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then told they her the tidings those courtly heralds good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Spake Schwemmelin in this wise: " My lady sends to thee</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her faithful love and duty; and if it so might be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she could see you often, she bids you to believe</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That in this world would nothing more gladness to her give."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whereto the queen made answer: " Alas, it may not be!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Often as I am longing my daughter dear to see,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Too distant dwelleth from me your noble monarch's wife.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>May she and Etzel ever be blessdd in their life.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"But ye must give me warning, ere from this place ye fare,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When ye will be returning; for heralds saw I ne'er</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For long days past so gladly, as I have look'd on you."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The squires then gave their promise her will therein to do.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And so unto their hostel the men from Hunsland went.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile for friends and kinsmen the mighty king had sent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble Gunther question put unto every man</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What thought he of the matter. And many then began</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To say that he might fairly ride unto Etzel's land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So counsell'd him the warriors who did around him stand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Excepting only Hagen,—to whom 'twas bitter woe.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He told the king in secret: " Thou wilt thyself undo.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Thou know'st as well as I do what thing we wrought of yore:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Needs must we of Kriemhilda be fearful evermore,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Seeing I slew her husband, and that with mine own hand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How durst we take this journey and ride to Etzel's land? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the mighty Gunther: " My sister's wrath was spent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Pardon to us she granted, ere from this place she went,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With kisses of forgiveness, for what to her was done:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unless, it may be, Hagen, that thee she hates alone."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Be not deceived," said Hagen, " whate'er the message be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The envoys bring from Hunsland. Would you Kriemhilda see,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Be well prepared to forfeit your honour and your life:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Long- waiting in her vengeance is she. King Etzel's wife."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon the princely Gernot unto the council said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Because that thou with reason to lose thy life dost dread</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Within the Huns' dominions, must we then lay aside</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This plan to see our sister? right ill would that betide."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Prince Giselher then also spake thus unto the knight:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Since thou, friend Hagen, knowest thou art the guilty wight,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So stay thou here in safety and of thyself take care,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And let, with us, the bold ones unto my sister fare."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With wrath began to kindle the warrior of Tronje:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I will not have another go with you on your way.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who dares than I more boldly on this court-ride to go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since ye will not be hinder'd, that will I let you know."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the kitchen-master, Rumold the worthy thane:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Here friends and strangers can ye right easily maintain</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As ye yourselves are willing: your stores are full, I trow;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ne'er, I ween, hath Hagen betray'd you hitherto.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"If ye will heed not Hagen, Rumold now counsels you—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And I have ever served you with love and service true—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That here ye fain should tarry, out of good will to me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And let King Etzel yonder along with Kriemhild be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"How otherwise in this world could ye e'er better live?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In spite of all your foemen here may you right well thrive;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>You may your bodies freely with raiment rich endue.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And wine drink of the choicest, and winsome maidens woo.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Meats, too, are set before ye,—the best that e'er were brought</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To any king in this world; and if this all were naught,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>You should, methinks, remain here for sake of your fair wife,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ere in such childish fashion you seek to risk your life.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I counsel your abiding: rich is your heritage.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At home can vassals better to you redeem their pledge</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than yonder 'mid the Hun-folk. Who knows how things be there?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My lords, go ye not thither: thus Rumold doth declare 1 "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereunto answer'd Gernot: " Here will we tarry not,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since we such friendly bidding have from my sister got,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And from the mighty Etzel. Why put the thing aside?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who goes not gladly with us may e'en at home abide."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And thereto answer'd Hagen: " See lest ye take amiss</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The words that I have spoken, howe'er ye do in this.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I give you faithful counsel: as ye regard your life,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Go well-arm'd to the Hun-folk, as if for battle- strife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Will ye not be dissuaded, so send ye for your men,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The best that ye can muster or any way can gain;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And from them all I'll choose ye a thousand warriors good:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So may ye fear no evil from angry Kriemhild's mood."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That rede I'll gladly follow," the king in answer said.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then sent he heralds riding, who through his kingdom sped.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so they brought the warriors, three thousand men or more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They dreamt not of the evil that lay for them in store.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>All through the lands of Gunther right joyously they rode.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On every man a charger and raiment were bestow'd—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of those who were to journey away from Burgundy.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A goodly number follow'd the king right willingly.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Hagen, lord of Tronje, his brother Dankwart bade</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The four score knights who served them unto the Rhine to lead.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They came in knightly order; with arms and wearing gear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Within King Gunther's borders right soon did they appear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now came the gallant Volker,—a high-born minstrel he,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To join with thirty liegemen the royal company.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Such splendid raiment had they, a king had worn it well.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he would ride to Hunsland, to Gunther bade he tell.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now who was this same Volker I fain would let you know:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He was of noble lineage; to him did fealty owe</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In the Burgundian country, full many a noble knight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Because he play'd the fiddle he was the Minstrel hight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Hagen chose the thousand: they were to him well-known;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And what in hard-fought battles their strength of hand had done,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all they e'er had ventured, that had he seen full well.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No man of aught save valour in all their deeds could tell.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The envoys of Kriemhilda were sore discomfited,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For they of both their rulers the wrath began to dread;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And leave they daily sought for, that they might thence begone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But Hagen would not grant it: through cunning that was done.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He said unto his masters: " We must be on our guard</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Lest we to go allow them, before we are prepared</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Within a week thereafter to Etzel's land to go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If any ill-will bear us, thus shall we better know.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"So shall not Dame Kriemhilda be taking heed hereto,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That any, by her counsel, should evil to us do.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And if it be her purpose her own may be the pain:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With us to Hunsland take we so many chosen men."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Their bucklers, then, and saddles, and all of such like gear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As they to Etzel's country had in their minds to bear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By many valiant liegemen for use were ready made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The envoys of Kriemhilda were unto Gunther bade.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And when the heralds enter'd, unto them Gernot said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"The king will take the offer to us by Etzel made;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And we will come right gladly unto his festival,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And see again our sister: of that doubt not at all."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake to them King Gunther: " Can ye not tell us, pray,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When is this merry-making? or rather, on what day</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Twere best that we come thither? " 'Twas Schwemmelin replied:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Ye must be there for certain at next Midsummer-tide."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king unto them granted, if haply they were will'd</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>(For not yet had they done it) to see the Dame Brunhild,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they with his approval might to her presence go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It was gainsaid by Volker: for her sake did he so.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"In sooth the Lady Brunhild is not now in the mood</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For you to look upon her," so spake the warrior good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Wait ye until to-morrow, then her they'll let you see."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So hoped they to behold her; but it was not to be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The mighty prince then order'd (he held those envoys dear)</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Out of his own great kindness, that folk should thither bear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His gold upon broad bucklers; great store thereof he had.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And by his kinsmen also rich gifts to them were made.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For Giselher and Gernot, Gere and Ortwein, too.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they were kindly-hearted right plainly then did shew.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They such abundant largess unto the envoys gave,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That, fearful of their rulers, none of it would they have.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Werbelin the herald unto the king did say:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Your gifts, Lord King, so please ye, let in your kingdom stay;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We may not take them with us; my lord bade us take heed,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Lest gifts by us be taken: nor is there any need."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then did the Lord of Rhineland this thing unkindly take,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they a great king's treasure of small account should make;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So were they bound to take it, his gold and habiting.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And unto Etzel's country were fain with them to bring.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They would see Ute also ere they set forth again.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So Giselher the ready brought both the minstrelmen</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto his mother Ute. This word the lady sent:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That if Kriemhild were honour'd her mother was content</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then bade the queen be given of gold and broidery,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All for the sake of Kriemhild,—so dear to her was she,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And for the sake of Etzel, unto the minstrels both.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They readily might take it: 'twas done in honest troth.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The messengers' leave-taking was done; and now they had</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Parted from men and maidens; and so with hearts right glad</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They rode on into Swabia; thus far 'twas Gernot's will</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His heroes should escort them, that none might do them ill.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they, who thus did guard them, parted and homewards rode,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In Etzel's power a safeguard they found on ev'ry road,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whence none essay'd to rob them of horse or wearing gear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so to Etzel's country they speedily drew near.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Where'er they found acquaintance, to them the news they said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How the Burgundian people, ere many days were sped,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the Hun-folk's country were coming from the Rhine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The news was carried also to Bishop Pilgerin.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As they by Bechelaren along the highway went,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Riideger folk told it,—as naught could well prevent—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And also to Gotlinda, the margrave's wedded wife.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she was soon to see them was joy unto her life.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Folk saw how with the tidings the minstrels swiftly rode.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until they found King Etzel at Gran, where he abode.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And greeting upon greeting which unto him were sent</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They to the king deliver'd; ruddy with joy he went.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And when the queen the tidings did fairly understand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That verily her brothers were coming to the land,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In mood she was right happy; and both the minstrelmen</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With costly gifts rewarded: and honour had she then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now Schwemmelin and Werbel, each one of you," said she,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Tell me which of my kinsmen will at our feasting be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of whom the best and dearest unto our land we bade?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, when the news was told him, tell me what Hagen said? '</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They said: " One morning early he came to the debate.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And not a good word from him we early had or late;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And when the ride to Hunsland was praised by all the folk</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Grim Hagen looked not elsewise than if of death they spoke.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Your brothers here are coming, the noble kings all three,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In high and lordly humour. But who with them may be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That news I cannot give you, seeing I do not know;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But Volker the bold minstrel hath vow'd with them to go."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Him could I spare right blithely," in answer spake the queen:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Since many a time and often here Volker have I seen.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But fain I am of Hagen, the hero excellent;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That here we soon shall see him doth give me much content."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then went the royal lady where she the king did find;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How gently Dame Kriemhilda unto him spake her mind!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"How do the tidings please thee, my lord beloved," she said,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Now all my heart hath yearned for shall be accomplished."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Thy will is eke my pleasure," thus did the king reply,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Nor any of my kindred so glad to see were I,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If e'er they should be coming hither unto my land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For sake of them that love thee is all my trouble bann'd."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>King's officers then straightway commandment gave to all</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That seats should be made ready in palace and in hall.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Meet for the guests beloved who would be there anon.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By them, ere long, for Etzel was pleasure all fordone.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
