<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XII: How Gunther Bade Siegfried to the Festival</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Gunther Bade Siegfried to the Festival</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now Gunther's wife the meanwhile was brooding ev'ry day:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Why bears herself Dame Kriemhild in such a lofty way?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Is not her husband Siegfried a vassal of our own?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Scant service hath he paid us in all these years agone! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Within her heart this kept she, and heed took thereanent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet that they came not ever did make her ill-content,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And that she got no service out of Sir Siegfried's land;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And wherefore this should happen she fain would understand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So of the king inquired she, whether it might not be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she the Lady Kriemhild yet once again might see?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She privily spoke to him of what her mind thus teased:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But when her lord had heard her, he was but half well-pleased.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And how are we to bring them," then said the mighty king,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Here into this our country? that were no easy thing!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Too far from us they're dwelling; to ask I am afraid."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then answer'd him Brunhilda, with crafty air and said:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"However high and mighty a king's man be, I say</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he his lord's commandments should never dare gainsay."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And to himself smiled Gunther whilst she laid down the law:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He had no thought of service whene'er he Siegfried saw.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She spake: " My lord beloved, I pray thee, for my sake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Lend me thine aid; that Siegfried may with thy sister take</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their journey to this country,—that here we them may see;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For nothing that could happen would be more sweet to me.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Thy sister's gentle breeding and well-contented mood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whene'er I think upon them, in sooth, it doth me good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How we did sit together, when first I was thy wife!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right well hath she deserved bold Siegfried's love and life."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So long she thus besought him, until the king did say:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Be sure that guests more welcome could ne'er be any day;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Tis easy to persuade me! and messengers of mine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll send unto the couple, to bring them to the Rhine."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the queen yet further: " Now also you must say</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When you will send to fetch them, and at what time we may</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Look for our well-loved kinsfolk to come unto our land:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And whom you purpose sending I fain would understand."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>733-</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"That will I do," the king said: " thirty of mine own men</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Will I send riding thither." These did he summon then,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And by them sent his message unto Prince Siegfried's land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Dame Brunhild to content them gave much apparel grand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said the king: " This message ye'll take, my warriors bold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherewith I now entrust ye—see that ye naught withhold—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the mighty Siegfried and to my sister dear:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That in this world doth no one more kindness to them bear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And pray that both do shortly come to us on the Rhine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For which we'll ever thank them, I and this lady mine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before this next midsummer he and his men shall see</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Things done, which to his pleasure and honour great shall be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And likewise to King Siegmund my service take and say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I and all my people be bound to him alway.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Say also to my sister, that she must tarry not;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>More worthy entertainment shall never be her lot."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Brunhilda and Queen Ut, and every dame at hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sent messages of service to all in Siegfried's land;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the lovely women, and many a man of worth.—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then by the king's good pleasure the messengers set forth.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In trav'lling guise they journey 'd; their steeds and wearing-gear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were ready made beforehand; so from the land they fare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They madg good progress onward to where their goal did lie.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The king came with an escort to speed his embassy.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>At end of three weeks' riding they came into the land</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherein the Niblung stronghold, where they were sent, did stand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On the Norwegian border; and there they found the thane.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Both steeds and men were weary with their long journey's pain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then was it unto Siegfried and to Kriemhilda said</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How knights had come on horseback and so apparelled</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As in Burgundian country the fashion was that day:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Straight from the couch up-sprang she whereon she resting lay.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And quickly to a window she bade a maiden go,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who saw the gallant Gere stand in the court below,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Him and the comrades with him, who had been thither sent;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Instead of all her heartache how great was her content!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the king then spake she: " Now look you down below,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How they with doughty Gere about the courtyard go,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whom my good brother Gunther here down the Rhine hath sent! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The stalwart Siegfried answered: " We'll make them well content."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then all the court attendants did hasten out to greet,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And every one among them did speak a welcome meet;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They gave unto the envoys the best words that they had.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The old King Siegmund likewise was of their coming glad.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>A lodging was appointed for Gere and his men,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The horses too were cared for. The messengers went then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the hall where Siegfried near to Kriemhilda sat.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At court they had free entry: and therefore did they that.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The host rose with the hostess and near to them did stand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right well was Gere welcomed from the Burgundian land,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With all his knightly comrades,—King Gunther's men to wit.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble Gere bade they upon the bench to sit.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Before we sit allow us to tell you of our news;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Though weary with our journey, to stand the while we choose.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We have to give a message which unto you we bring</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From Gunther and Brunhilda,—and weighty is this thing.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And likewise what Dame Ute, your mother, sendeth you,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Giselher the young knight, and noble Gernot too,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all your nearest kinsfolk, from whom we have command</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To offer you their greeting from the Burgundian land."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now God reward ye, heralds," cried Siegfried, " and I trust</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto your truth and kindness,—as towards friends we must,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So likewise doth their sister;— and now your tidings give</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If still our friends beloved at home in gladness live.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Since we from them departed hath no one evil done</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto Kriemhilda's kinsmen? let that to me be known.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My faithful help is ready in ev'ry time of need,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until mine aid and service their foes shall rue indeed! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then quoth the Margrave Gere,—he was a warrior good:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Right happily abide they in all good livelihood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They bid you to the Rhineland, to a high festival;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right gladly will they see you, of that doubt not at all.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"They pray my lady also that she will thither wend</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So soon as e'er the winter shall come unto its end.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before this next midsummer your faces would they see."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the stalwart Siegfried: " Nay, that can hardly be! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But further spake Sir Gere, from the Burgundian land;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"It is your mother Ute who maketh this demand;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Eke Giselher and Gernot, ye must not them gainsay:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ye be so far distant I hear complaints each day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Brunhilda, too, my mistress, and all her maidens fair</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Rejoice at this my errand; if likelihood there were</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they once more might see you, happy would be their mood."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the fair Krierahilda this message seemed right good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As Gere was her kinsman, the host then bade him sit.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wine for the guests he ordered; nor long they wanted it.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thither, too, came Siegmund, who had the heralds seen;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To the Burgundian heroes he spake with friendly mien:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Be welcome, Gunther's liegemen, ye warriors, every one!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since it hath happ'd that Siegfried my son to wife hath won</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda fair, more often ye would we gladly see</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In this our land, if truly to us ye'll friendly be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They said that if he wish'd it they'd gladly come again.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so in pleasure vanish'd their weariness and pain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The messengers were seated, and food was brought them there:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For guests so welcome Siegfried had plenty of good fare.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For nine days' space and longer to stay they were constrain'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until, at last, the horsemen, who would be gone, complain'd</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That back into their country they never more would ride.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile his friends King Siegfried had summon'd to his side,</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To ask them what they counsell'd: would they go to the Rhine?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"He hath sent here to fetch me, Gunther, that friend of mine,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He and his kinsfolk bid us to keep festivity:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'd gladly go there, save that his land too far doth lie.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"They also bid Kriemhilda to go along with me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now counsel me, dear kinsmen, how thither come shaH she?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If I through thirty kingdoms my men, for them, must lead,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Still Siegfried's hand to serve them must ready be indeed."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake his chiefs unto him: " If you've a mind unto</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The journey to this hightide, we'll counsel what to do:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>You with a thousand warriors unto the Rhine shall ride;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So may you with all honour in Burgundy abide."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the noble Siegmund, of Netherland the lord:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Will ye unto this feasting, and tell me not a word?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>An if it will not shame you I'll ride along with you;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll take a hundred swordsmen to swell your retinue."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Wilt thou in sooth ride with us, my own good father dear?"</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Exclaimed the gallant Siegfried: "right gladly that I hear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before twelve days are over my fatherland I'll leave."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To all who did desire them they steeds and raiment gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now that the noble ruler was minded soon to start,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The heralds swift were bidden straight homewards to depart,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And unto his wife's kinsmen upon the Rhine to say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he would very gladly with them keep holyday.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Both Siegfried and Kriemhilda, as doth the story say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>More gifts gave to the heralds than could be borne away</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On their own horses homewards: a wealthy man was he I</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their sturdy beasts of burden they drove right merrily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Their folk were cloth'd by Siegfried and Siegmund worthily.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Eckewart the margrave gave orders speedily</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To seek out women's raiment, the best that could be found,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Or anywhere be heard of in Siegfried's lands around.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The saddles and the bucklers began they to prepare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And to the knights and ladies who should the journey share,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Was given whate'er they wanted, that they might fail in naught.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto his friends full many a noble guest he brought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The heralds did not loiter upon the journey home.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And soon the gallant Gere to Burgundy was come,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Where right well was he welcomed: they then alighted all</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From chargers and from palfreys before King Gunther's hall.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The youths went and the elders, as men are wont to do,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To ask what might the news be. Then spake the good knight true:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"When to the king I've told it the rest of you shall know."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then straightway with his comrades did he to Gunther go.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king, in joy to see them, rose quickly from his chair.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they had come so swiftly also from Brunhild fair</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Received they thanks, while Gunther unto the envoys spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"How fares it now with Siegfried? much wrought he for my sake."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the gallant Gere: " For joy his face grew red,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Both his and your fair sister's; and ne'er was message sped,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From any man of honour unto his friends, more true</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than Siegfried and his father by me have sent to you.''</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then thus unto the margrave the noble king's wife spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Say, now, is Kriemhild coming? and care doth she yet take</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To keep the outward fairness, which she to foster knew? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Aye," said the warrior Gere, "doubtless she comes to you."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Ute to her presence the heralds did command,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And by her question might one right plainly understand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What she to hear was longing: " Still well did Kriemhild fare? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He told how he had found her, and that she'd soon be there.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Nor from the court retainers did they the gifts withhold</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they had had from Siegfried: the raiment and the gold</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In sight of all the liegemen of the three kings were spread.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For their abundant largesse were many thanks repaid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"'Tis easy," then said Hagen, "for him such gifts to give:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He could not spend his riches did he for ever live.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The treasure of the Niblungs he holds within his hand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ha, what if it should ever come to Burgundian land! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then was there great rejoicing among the people all</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That soon the guests were coming. From dawn till evenfall</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The three kings' craftsmen labour'd, with zeal untiring fiU'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Grand rows of seats in plenty they then began to build.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The valiant Sir Hunold and Sindold too, the thane.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had little time for leisure; they too must work amain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As steward and cupbearer the places they must set.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Ortwein help'd them: wherefore they Gunther's thanks did get.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Rumold the kitchenmaster, knew well to rule aright</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His underlings and scullions! Ay me! it was a sight</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To see the polish'd kettles and pots and pans at hand!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For food must be made ready when guests were in the land.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
