<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXXII: How Bloedelin Was Slain</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-32" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Bloedelin Was Slain</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The warriors of Bloedel were ready for the fray;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Clad in their thousand hauberks they thither took their way</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Where Dankwart with his yeomen still at the table sate;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There rose between the heroes a strife of deadly hate.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As soon as the Lord Bloedel before the table went,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Dankwart the marshal met him on greeting due intent:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Right welcome to our hostel, Lord Bloedelin, are ye,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Although I greatly marvel what may the reason be? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Thou hast no need to greet me," so answer'd Bloedelin:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"For this my coming bodeth an end to thee and thine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thanks to thy brother Hagen, who erewhile Siegfried slew.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That to the Huns thou'lt answer, and many another too."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Nay, say not so. Lord Bloedel," the marshal Dankwart said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Else must we rue too quickly this journey we have made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I was but a small stripling when Siegfried lost his life;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I know not what against me bringeth King Etzel's wife."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"No more about the matter know I to say to you,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Save that your kinsmen did it, Gunther, and Hagen too.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Look to yourselves, ye lost ones, ye go not hence away!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By death must ye the forfeit unto Kriemhilda pay."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"What! and will nothing turn you? " cried Dankwart thereupon:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Would I had ne'er besought you, that better were undone! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Up from the table sprang he, the warrior swift and strong,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And drew a keen-edged weapon, that heavy was and long.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Therewith he struck at Bloedel, with stroke of sword so fleet,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That off his head was smitten, and lay before his feet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Be that thy wedding-dower," the warrior Dankwart said,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Unto the bride of Nudung, whom thou wouldst woo and wed!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"To-morrow they may plight her unto another one:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If he will earn the guerdon, the like to him be done! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A faithful-hearted Hunsman Dankwart aware had made,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How that the queen against him such grievous plots had laid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When now the men of Bloedel saw how their lord lay slain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then from the guests no longer their hands could they restrain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With broadswords high uplifted they sprang in deadly mood</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the youthful warriors: which ere long many rued.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then loudly shouted Dankwart unto his followers all:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Well see ye, noble yeomen, how things are like to fall!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ye hapless ones, be wary, in sooth there 's need to be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Albeit noble Kriemhild bade us right lovingly."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They to whom swords were lacking, reach'd down before each seat,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many a long stool lifted from underneath their feet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then the Burgundian yeomen no longer would forbear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And heavy stools made bruises through many a helmet there.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>How grimly thus the strangers essay'd their lives to save!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so the arm'd assailants from out the house they drave;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet left they dead within it five hundred men or more:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all of the defenders were red and wet with gore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>These tidings of disaster were carried presently</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the knights of Etzel (which grieved them bitterly):</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How Bloedel and his Hegemen had all to death been brought,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which deed had Hagen's brother with his retainers wrought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Ere yet the king had heard it—urg'd by the hate they bore—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The Hunfolk donn'd their armour; two thousand men or more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And march'd against the yeomen;— what else was to be done?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And out of all the people they left alive not one.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Before the house the traitors had led a mighty host;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On guard the foreign yeomen stood bravely at their post.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But what avail'd their valour? They all were doom'd to die;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And presently arose there a gruesome butchery.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And here ye must a marvel of monstrous import hear:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nine thousand yeomen lying all done to death there were;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A dozen knights moreover of Dankwart's own command.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One saw him all-forsaken amidst the foemen stand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The uproar was abated, the clash of arms was o'er.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then look'd athwart his shoulder Dankwart the warrior;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He spake: " Woe for the comrades who from my side are gone!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alas, that 'midst the foemen I now must stand alone! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upon his body shower'd the sword-strokes keen and rife;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ere long to be bewailed by many a hero's wife—.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His shield aloft he lifted, and held the arm-brace low;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And drench'd full many a hauberk with life-blood's crimson flow.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then cried the son of Aldrian: " Woe for the ills I bear!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Make way, ye Hunnish warriors, and let me to the air,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That the wind's breath may cool me, a battle-weary wight! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right royally he bore him in all the people's sight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But when the strife-worn hero outside the hostel sprang,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What fresh swords on his helmet again and ever rang!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who had not yet witness'd what wonders wrought his hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now rush'd to meet the warrior from the Burgundian land.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now would to God," cried Dankwart, " I had a messenger</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To seek my brother Hagen, and make him well aware</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How I amid these warriors so sorely am bested!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hence surely would he help me, or lie beside me dead! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the Hunnish warriors: " That herald must thou be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When we before thy brother a corse shall carry thee!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So first shall Gunther's henchman what sorrow is be taught:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou hast unto King Etzel such grievous damage wrought."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Said he: " Now stint your threatenings, and further backwards get,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Or verily I'll drench you some other hauberks yet!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I will myself the story before the court lay bare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke unto my masters my grievance great declare."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He laid on Etzel's liegemen so heavily his hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That not a man amongst them durst him with sword withstand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet in his shield their lances so quickly did they aim,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he was fain to drop it, so heavy it became.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Him, now no longer shielded, they thought to overwhelm;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ha, but what deadly gashes he cut right through the helm!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until before him stagger'd full many a valiant oi.e:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby much praise and honour the gallant Dankwart won.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>From one side and the other, upon him hurtled they;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, some of them too quickly had come into the fray!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before the foe upstood he, e'en as a woodland boar</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At bay the sleuth-hounds faces: could valour e'er be more?</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>His path was newly-sprinkled with life-blood warm and wet.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No single-handed warrior had ever striven yet</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Against a host of foemen, as he had boldly done.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Folk mark'd how Hagen's brother to court right nobly won.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>By sewers and by butlers was heard the clash of swords;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From many a hand the liquors were flung upon the boards,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As were the victuals also which to the hall they bare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And stalwart foes in plenty forestall'd him at the stair.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"What will ye now, ye sewers? " the weary warrior cried:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"In sooth for all the strangers, good cheer ye should provide,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And to the nobles ought ye good victuals to convey;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And to my well-lov'd masters let me my tidings say."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whoe'er by force before him upon the stairway sprang.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On each of them so sorely his heavy sword he swang,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In very dread their safety further aloof they sought;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so his strength of body right mickle marvels wrought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
