<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XX: How King Etzel Sent to Burgundy After Kriemhilda</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-20" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How King Etzel Sent to Burgundy After Kriemhilda</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now on a time it happen'd that lady Helka died;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then was King Etzel minded to woo another bride;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His friends all bade him look to the land of Burgundy,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Towards a high-bom widow; Kriemhilda named was she.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Soon after the fair Helka departed had this life,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Quoth they: " If thou would'st ever possess a noble wife,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The highest and most worthy that king did ever have,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then take this self-same lady, widow of Siegfried brave."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"How might that be accomplish'd," then said the mighty king,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Seeing I am a heathen and ne'er had christening?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The lady is a Christian; she never would agree.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A miracle must happen, if this should ever be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The ready ones made answer: " What if perchance she should?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With thy high name to help thee and all thy substance good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To win the noble lady one very well might try.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To woo so fair a person would please you verily."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said the noble sovereign: " Doth any one of you</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The people of the Rhine-land and eke the country know? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Good Riideger made answer, who from Bechlaren came:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I've known her from her childhood, this queen of noble name.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"King Gunther and King Gernot, the noble knights and brave.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Giselher, the third one,—each ever doth behave</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In such wise as high honour and virtue too have taught;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor elsewise from aforetime have their forefathers wrought."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But furthermore said Etzel: " Friend, I would learn of thee</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If in my land she 's worthy to wear the crown with me?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And if she 's fair of body as has to me been said?—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then those to me most friendly, need never be dismay'd."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Indeed unto my lady in beauty likeneth she,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Helka, the most mighty; ay! in this world could be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For any king whatever never a wife more fair.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To whom her love she plighteth he may be of good cheer</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He spake: " Then win her, Riideger, if dear to thee am I.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And if beside Kriemhilda it e'er be mine to lie,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I will reward thee for it as fully as may be;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Seeing thou wilt my wishes have compass'd thoroughly.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"So much out of my treasure I'll have bestow'd on thee</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That thou and thy companions may live right merrily;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of horses and of raiment whatever you may need,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I will have for your journey made ready with all speed.'</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Sir Riideger made answer:—a mighty margrave he—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Did I thy riches covet, that were unpraiseworthy.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the Rhine thy message to bear I shall be glad</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At charge of mine own fortune, which from thy hands I had."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the mighty sovereign: "Now when wilt thou fare hence</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To seek this lovely lady? May God give thee defence</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And honour in the journey, and eke this lady mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>May she to us, luck helping, a gracious ear incline."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Riideger spake further: " Ere yet we leave the land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We must prepare both raiment and weapons to our hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That so before the princes due honour we may have.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll lead unto the Rhine-land five hundred warriors brave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"So, me and mine beholding, the men of Burgundy</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Shall every man among them be fain to testify</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ne'er from king in those parts on such a journey went</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So many men or better than thou to the Rhine hast sent.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And be it not displeasing by thee, great ruler, found</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That, noble love obeying, she was in wedlock bound</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Siegfried, son of Siegmund; him hast thou here beheld.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In honour great he must be in truth for ever held."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said King Etzel: " Though she was wife unto that knight,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet was his noble body so precious in my sight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That on the queen I cannot e'er look disdainfully;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By her exceeding beauty right well she pleaseth me."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake to him the margrave: " The four and twentieth day</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From now, I dare to promise, shall see us on our way.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll send and tell Gotlinda, my dear wife, presently,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I myself will envoy unto Kriemhilda be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So thence unto Bechlaren sent Riideger straightway.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Both sorrowful and proud was the margravine that day.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A wife by him, he told her, must for the king be woo'd;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Still tenderly, as living, she thought of Helka good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For when her husband's letter the margravine did spell</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Some little was she troubled and straight to weeping fell.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Would she another mistress like her have e'er again?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And when she thought of Helka it gave her heartfelt pain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In seven days' space had Riideger set forth from Hungary.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A glad man was King Etzel, and gay at heart was he.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Already in Vienna the travelling gear was made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor would he that the journey should longer be delayed.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Gotlinda at Bechlaren awaited Riideger;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The margravine his daughter was also waiting there,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And glad she was on seeing her father and his men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many fair young maidens watch'd kindly for them then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Ere Riideger the noble forth for Bechlaren went</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From out Vienna's city, all his accoutrement</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Was perfectly made ready and on the sumpters laid.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They travell'd in such fashion that nothing was waylaid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they to Bechelaren within the town did fare,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The host his fellow travellers bade kindly welcome there,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And offer'd board and lodging. Good quarters each one had.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble Gotelinda to see him come was glad.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Likewise his well-loved daughter, the little margravine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>At her dear father's coming could ne'er have gladder been.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The heroes out of Huns' land how glad she was to see I</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And them the noble maiden accosted merrily:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Right heartily be welcome my father and his men! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And readily, to thank her, fair words were spoken then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the margrave's daughter, by many a worthy knight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sir Riideger's demeanour Gotlinda read aright.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>For when alone at night-time by Riideger she lay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How lovingly besought him the margravine to say</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whither the king from Huns' land had bidden him to go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Said he: "My wife Got'linda, I'll gladly let thee know.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I for the king my master must seek another wife,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now that the beauteous Helka departed hath this life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Therefore to fetch Kriemhilda unto the Rhine ride we;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Huns' land she is coming a mighty queen to be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"God grant," said Gotelinda, " that that may come to pass</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since we have heard, in honour, how much she doth surpass.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She may replace my lady belike, in days to be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We'll let her wear in Huns' land the queen's crown willingly."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said the margrave to her: " Beloved wife of mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The men who hence are riding with me unto the Rhine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All kindly must thou offer with them thy stores to share:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When heroes fare right nobly more stout of heart they are."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She answered: " There is no man who cares to take of me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To whom whate'er beseemeth I give not willingly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Or ever hence depart ye, thou and thy fighting men."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then said to her the margrave: "So doth it please me then."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, and what noble garments they from the store-rooms bare!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For every noble warrior there was a plenteous share.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All lined they were with peltry downwards from throat to spur;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What best his purpose suited was chosen of Riideger.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the seventh morning from Bechelaren rode</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The host with all his warriors. Weapons and raiment good</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They bore with them in plenty through the Bavarian land;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor on the road were harass'd by any robber band.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Within a twelve days' journey they to the Rhine did ride;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The tidings of their coming small chance there was to hide.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Some to the king gave warning, and eke his men did tell.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That stranger-guests were coming. The host to asking fell</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>If they were known to any? that was he fain to know.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One saw their sumpter-horses so heavy-laden go:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they were very wealthy was plain enough to see.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In the great town was found them a hostel presently.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now when the all-unknown ones were given an abode,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon these self-same nobles vast was the heed bestow'd:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Men wondered whence the warriors to the Rhine had found their way.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The host sent after Hagen, if haply he could say.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the knight of Tronjd: " I have not seen them yet,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I doubtless may declare you when sight of them I get,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From whence they've come a-riding into this land. I trow</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They must indeed be strangers if naught of them I know."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>By this time every stranger a place of lodging had.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then forward came the envoy, in rich apparel clad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With all his noble comrades; and so to court they rode.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fine raiment were they wearing right well-devised in mode.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then quoth the ready Hagen: " For all that I can tell—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Not having seen these nobles for somewhat of a spell—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Such like is their demeanour as Riideger might have.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Out of the Hunnish country,—a noble knight and brave."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"How am I to believe it," the king replied straightway,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"That he of Bechelaren is hither come this day? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But as the royal Gunther from speaking did forbear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Bold Hagen saw for certain that it was Riideger.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He and his friends to meet them, did hasten everyone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One saw from off their horses five hundred knights stand down.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These messengers from Hunsland right welcome were they made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And never yet were envoys so gallantly array'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Hagen spake of Tronje, and in a loud voice cried:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Now in God's name be welcome ye thanes who hither ride,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The Warden of Bechlaren, and each one of his men."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>An honourable greeting the doughty Huns had then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>King Gunther's nearest kinsmen, came forth to where they were,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The lord of Metz, Sir Ortwein, then said to Riideger:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Ne'er yet in all our life-time have we until this day</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Set eyes on guests so gladly: that may I truly say."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thanks gave they for the greeting unto the warriors all;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So with their noble escort, they went unto the hall.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And there they found King Gunther with a gallant company,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And from his throne upstood he, such was his courtesy.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With what right courtly breeding did he the envoys meet!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Gernot, as well as Gunther, was full of zeal to greet</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The guest and eke his liegemen, as did his rank demand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Good Riideger King Gunther himself took by the hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the seat he led him, on which himself he sat:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then to the strangers served they,—all gladly did they that—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of right good mead full beakers, and of the best of wine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ever one could meet with in all the land of Rhine.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now Giselher and Gere had both of them appear'd;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Dankwart, too, and Volker, who all of them had heard</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>About the guests arriving; they were in gladsome mood:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before the king they greeted the noble knights and good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Hagen, knight of Tronje, unto his lord did say:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"These warriors of ours should be beholden aye</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For kindness that the margrave hath shown to us before:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fair Gotelinda's husband must have reward therefore."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the royal Gunther: " I can no more delay;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In health how are they faring, that tell to me, I pray;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Etzel, I mean, and Helka, who over Hunsland reign? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"All will I," said the margrave, "gladly to you make plain."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Straight from the seat uprose he, as eke did all his men,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And to the king thus spake he: "If thus it may be then,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And you, O prince, allow it, I will no more delay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The tidings that I bring you, but willingly will say."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He said: " Whate'er the tidings that unto us you bear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I wait not friendly counsel, but bid you to declare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Let me and my men hear them, whatever they may be;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I bid you, in all honour, discharge your embassy."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the trusty envoy: " To you upon the Rhine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His faithful service tenders that mightful lord of mine;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To every friend moreover that unto you may be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This message I deliver, in faith and honesty:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"The noble king doth ask for your pity in his need.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All joyless are his people: my lady she is dead,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The rich and mighty Helka, of my good lord the wife;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And now full many a maiden doth lead an orphan'd life—</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Children of noble princes, whom she did rear of late—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And therefore is the country in lamentable state:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These now, alas, have no one to rear them faithfully.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I doubt there is no ending to the king's misery."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Requite him God," said Gunther, " for that to me he sends</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So willingly his service, as eke unto my friends!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The greeting thou hast brought me right gladly have I heard:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My kinsmen and my lieges shall merit his good word."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake, from the Burgundians, Gernot the warrior:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"The world fair Helka's dying may rue for evermore,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For all her many virtues, which she to cherish knew."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The doughty knight, Sir Hagen, agreed that this was true.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But Riideger said further, the high ambassador:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Since you, O king, allow me, I have to tell you more</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of that which my dear master hath bidden me fulfil;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since from the death of Helka things have with him gone ill.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"It hath been told my master that, Siegfried being dead,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda is a widow. If this be so, indeed,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And you to her will grant it, then she a crown shall wear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before King Etzel's warriors: this have I to declare."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The mighty monarch answer'd (in courteous mood was he):</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"I'll tell her my opinion, if she perchance agree.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll see that you our answer in three days' time shall know,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How should I, ere I've asked her, say unto Etzel, no?</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile they had good lodgings made ready for each guest.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So well provided were they, that Riideger confessed</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he had friends in plenty amongst King Gunther's men;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As he had once served Hagen, so Hagen served him then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So Riideger abode there till the third day was come.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The king a council summon'd, (as was his wise custom)</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Inquiring of his kinsmen if they would deem it right</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That Kriemhild should to Etzel her faith in wedlock plight</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They all, save only Hagen, agreed with one accord;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But he unto the warrior, to Gunther spake this word:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"If you are rightly minded, so will you take good heed,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That, even though she wish it, you will not do this deed."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And wherefore," answer'd Gunther, "should I not do this thing?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whate'er of love the future unto the queen may bring,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I surely shall not grudge her: sister she is to me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We ought ourselves to seek it, if for her good it be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But once again spake Hagen: " With further talk be done!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Knew you as much of Etzel as I of him have known,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And were she him to marry, as I have heard you say,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then would yon see good reason, at length to rue the day."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And wherefore? ' answered Gunther, " since I should take good care</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Never to come so nigh him, e'en though my sister were</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His wife, that I need suffer from any hate of his."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But once again said Hagen: " I'll ne'er agree to this."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then messengers to Gernot and Giselher they sent,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To ask of these two princes if they were well content</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To have Kriemhilda marry the rich and noble king.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sir Hagen still gainsayed it, but had no following.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake of the Burgundians the warrior Giselher:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Now may you show, friend Hagen, that loyal still you are:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Make good to her the evil that you to her have done:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If aught may bring her fortune, that should you leave alone.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"You've wrought unto my sister such evil manifold,"—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So Giselher spake further,—the knight of spirit bold:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"That she hath had good reason to hold you in despite.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ne'er yet was any woman bereft of more delight."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That am I well aware of and willing to allow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And should she marry Etzel and live for long enow,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Shell do us yet much evil, howe'er she it contrive;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For many a goodly warrior to serve her there doth live."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon the valiant Gernot to Hagen answered:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"In that case it behoves us, until they both be dead,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To study that we ride not into King Etzel's land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We must be loyal to her: thus honour doth demand."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whereto again spake Hagen: "No man can me gainsay!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And should the noble Kriemhild v;ear Helka's crown one day,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She'll do to us a mischief, howe'er it may be done:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It better would beseem you to leave the thing alone."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then wrathfully cried Giselher, of Ut fair the son:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"We need not all be traitors, though thou perchance be one!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If honour doth befall her, right joyful should we be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whate'er thou sayest, Hagen, I'll serve her faithfully."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When Hagen heard that saying, anger'd was he in mood:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For Giselher and Gernot, proud warriors both and good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And mighty Gunther likewise, did all of them agree</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That if it pleased Kriemhilda they would no hindrance be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spoke the princely Gere: " The lady I'll advise</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she do let King Etzel find favour in her eyes:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So many knights obey him, and suit and service owe,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He yet may make her happy in spite of all her woe."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then went the ready warrior where Kriemhild he did see;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She graciously received him: how quickly then spake he!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Well may you greet me, lady, and give me herald's bread,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For good luck comes to save you now out of all your need.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"For love of you, dear lady, lo! there hath hither sent</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One of the best and greatest that e'er had government</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>O'er realm with highest honour, or ever crown shall wear;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And noble knights sue for him: your brother bids declare."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the sorrow-laden: " Now God prohibit thee</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all my friends from making a mockery of me!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of me, the poor forlorn one! what could I be to one</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who heart-felt love hath ever from a good woman won? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She sorely strove against it; but presently to her</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There came her brother Gernot and the lad Giselher.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These tenderly besought her to be of cheerful mood:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If she the king would marry, 'twould be for her true good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Not one of them was able the lady to persuade,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she should e'er be willing another man to wed;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then did the thanes beseech her: " At least we beg of thee—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If thou naught else wilt grant us—the messengers to see."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"That will I not refuse ye," replied the noble wife,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"For gladly would I look on Sir Riideger in life,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For all his many virtues. If he it had not been.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whoever were the envoy, I would have stay'd unseen."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She spake: " To-morrow morning, I pray ye, bid him go</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To see me in my chamber; then will I let him know</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What is my will, right surely: to tell him am I fain."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then did her grievous sorrow break forth in tears again.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To Riideger the noble naught better could have been</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than that he should be granted to see the mighty queen:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He knew that, could this happen, so wise in words was he,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She, by the warrior's talking, must needs persuaded be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So, early on the morrow, after the mass was sung,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Arrived the noble envoys; then mighty was the throng.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of those who to the palace with Riideger should go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All gallantly accoutred; one saw a goodly show.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The highborn dame Kriemhilda her heart with trouble sore,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For Riideger was waiting,—the goodly warrior.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He found her in the raiment she wore for ev'ry day:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But none the less her women had donn'd their best array.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She rose and went to meet him, and by the door she stood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And unto Etzel's liegeman she gave a welcome good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With but eleven comrades he came therein to her.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Worship had he, for never came nobler messenger.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>One bade them all be seated,—the leader and his men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The while before her standing they saw her margraves twain,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Counts Eckewart and Gere,—both noble knights and good.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For sake of her, their mistress, none seem'd of ioyful mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They saw beside her sitting full many a lady fair.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For nothing save her sorrow had Kriemhild any care.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The raiment on her bosom was wet with tear-drops hot,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor fail'd the noble margrave Kriemhilda's grief to note.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the lordly envoy: " Daughter of kingly race,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To me and to my comrades who here with me have place,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I pray you leave to grant us that we before you stand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And tell to you the errand that brings us to this land."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now be it to you granted," the queen in answer said,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"To speak as ye are minded; for I am purposed</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right willingly to listen: thou art a herald good."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet to the others' hearing unwilling was her mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then he of Bechelaren, Prince Riideger, began:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"With plenteous love, and faithful, Etzel, a great sovran,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To this thy land, fair lady, hath sent an embassy</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of knights to seek thy favour,—a goodly company.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"He offers thee right frankly love free from all alloy:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke such stedfast friendship thou shalt with him enjoy,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As erewhile did dame Helka, so near his heart who lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, he hath mourn'd her virtues for many a joyless day."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Sir Riideger the margrave," in answer spake the queen,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"No one who hath already my bitter sorrow seen,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To any man would bid me myself in wedlock bind.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! I have lost the best one that ever wife did find."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>What else," the bold man answer'd, "for sorrow may atone</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So well as loving friendship, if such may be, from one</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who for himself is choosing what seems to him the best?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Naught, after heartfelt sorrow, can give such happy rest.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"If to my noble master to give thy love thou'lt deign,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of twelve right wealthy kingdoms thou shalt be sovereign.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My lord will also give you full thirty princes' lands.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Each one of which was conquer'd by his all-potent hands.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Thereto shalt thou be mistress of many a worthy wight</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who to my lady Helka did service owe of right;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And over many a lady who dwelt beneath her sway,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of high and princely lineage." Thus did the bold knight say.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"My lord will likewise give thee, as he doth bid me say—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If with the king thou deignest to wear the crown one day—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The highest power that ever he unto Helka gave:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou over Etzel's vassals authority shalt have."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the queen: "What pleasure remains for me in life,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ever I should covet to be a hero's wife?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Such sorrow have I suffer'd all through the death of one,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I must aye be joyless, until my life be done."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But once more spake the Hunsman: " Most high and noble queen,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Your life along with Etzel so glorious would be seen,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Naught would it be but gladness, if this should come to pass:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many a handsome warrior the mighty monarch has."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"The damsels of Queen Helka, the maids that follow thee,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Shall make with one another a single company;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A sight at which the warriors shall merry be of mood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Be counsell'd therefore, lady; in sooth 'tis for thy good! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With courtesy she answer'd: " Now let this parley be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until to-morrow early; then come again to me</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And you shall have my answer to what you have at heart"</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Needs must the valiant warrior agree, and so depart.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they unto their hostel had all returned home,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then sent the noble lady for Giselher to come.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And likewise for her mother: and unto both did vow,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That nothing else save weeping was fitting for her now.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Said Giselher, her brother: " Sister, 'tis my belief—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And some to me have said it—that all thy bitter grief</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Etzel will make vanish: and shouldst thou marry him—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whatever others counsel—well done I will it deem.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"He surely may console thee," said Giselher again:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"From Rhone unto the Rhine-stream, from Elbe unto the main,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There's not another sovran so powerful as he.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right soon may'st thou be happy, if wife he makes of thee."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"My brother well beloved, how canst thou thus advise?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To weep and mourn seems ever more fitting in mine eyes.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How, at the court there, should I before the warriors go?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If ever I were comely, no longer am I so."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the lady Ut her daughter dear unto:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Whate'er thy brothers counsel, fail not, dear child, to do;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Follow thy friends' advising, so will it prosper thee.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Too long have I beheld thee in thy great misery."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then God she pray'd right sorely that store of worldly gear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of silver, gold and raiment be granted unto her,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To give; as when her husband in life and health she had;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Though never as aforetime could life again be glad.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Within her heart she ponder'd: " Shall I my body give—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who am a Christian woman—and with a heathen wive?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fore all the world and ever disgrace on me 'twould bring,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Though all his wealth he gave me, I would not do this thing! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And so she left the matter: but all night long, till day,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The lady on her pillow with endless brooding lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her eyes that shone so brightly, from tears were never dried,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until at dawn of morning unto the mass she hied.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The kings came thither also close on the hour of mass;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They had been taking counsel upon their sister's case:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To marry they advised her the king of Hungary.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But neither found the lady disposed more cheerfully.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Forthwith were orders given King Etzel's men to bring,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who now would leave have taken and home been travelling,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Accepted or rejected, whichever of the twain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then to the court came Riideger. The heroes urged again</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>That he should rightly fathom the noble Gunther's mood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And do it very quickly: to all did this seem good:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To get back to their country, they needs must journey far.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so unto Kriemhilda they usher'd Riideger.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With kindly words of pleading began the warrior;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble queen beseeching that she would let him hear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What message for his master, to Etzel's land she sent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ween he found her answer naught save discouragement:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>That she forsooth would never again wed anyone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereon the margrave answer'd: " That surely were ill-don?!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Why shouldst thou thy fair body so wastefully disdain?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou mightst become with honour a good man's wife again."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But naught avail'd their praying, until that Riideger</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All privately did whisper into the great queen's ear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That all she ever suffer'd he would make good again.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereat her great misliking somewhat began to wane.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the queen thus spake he: " Let now your weeping be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If you among the Hunsfolk had ne'er a friend save me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all my trusty kinsmen, and eke my liegemen true,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hath any done you evil right dearly should he rue."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thenceforth the lady's humour somewhat more gentle grew.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She said: " An oath now give me: whatever men may do</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That you will be the first one to right mine injury."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereto the margrave answer'd: " That will I readily."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With all his men did Riideger swear by an oath to her</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he would serve her truly; and that no warrior</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Should ever aught deny her, throughout King Etzel's land,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In what concern'd her honour. So pledged her Riideger's hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then, faithful-hearted, thought she: " Since on my will to wait</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I've met with friends so many, I'll let the people prate</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Howe'er they have a mind to, of me, poor wretched wife!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What if I yet have vengeance for my dear husband's life? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She thought: "Since Etzel holdeth so many knights in fee,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I also may command them, and do what pleaseth me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So wealthy is he also, I shall have much to give:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Me did that hateful Hagen of all my goods deprive."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To Riideger thus spake she: " If it were known to me</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he were not an heathen, I would come willingly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whithersoe'er he listeth, and take him for my lord."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The margrave answer'd: " Lady, heed not a single word.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"He hath so many warriors, who in Christ's faith believe</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That with the king at no time shall you have cause to grieve.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What if your faith should win him to take the Christian life?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then might you well be happy to be King Etzel's wife."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said her brothers also: " Now, sister mine, say ' Yes,'</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so be quit for ever of your unhappiness."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus long did they beseech her, till, full of sorrow, she</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before the heroes promised King Etzel's wife to be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She said: " You will I follow, a queen right sad of heart,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And fare with you to Huns' land; so may we now depart,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When I the friends have found me to bring me to his land."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To that, before the heroes, fair Kriemhild gave her hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then to her said the margrave: " Hast thou a pair of men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To them I can add many: it will be easy then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To bring you with due honour unto Rhine's further side:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No longer, mid Burgundians, lady, must thou abide.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I have five hundred liegemen, and kinsmen too, of whom</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou mayst command the service,—or here, or there at home</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To do thy bidding, lady; and I will do the same.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whene'er thou claim 'st my promise,—that so I have no shame.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now see that you have ready your horse accoutrement;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What Riideger doth counsel you never shall repent;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And say this to your maidens whom you will thither bring:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>' Ay, many a chosen hero shall we meet travelling.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Still much of wrought equipment from Siegfried's time they had,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That had been used in riding; wherewith full many a maid</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Might take the road with honour whene'er they thence should fare.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! goodly were the saddles they gave the ladies fair.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>If such-like costly raiment they ere had worn before,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now ready for the journey they had a goodly store;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For of the King such marvels had unto them been said.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Chests that had long been standing close-lock'd were open laid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unwearyingly work'd they till unto the fifth day;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They sought from out the presses the stores that in them lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her treasure-chests to open Kriemhild herself did go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On Riideger's good liegemen she fain would wealth bestow.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Still had she somewhat over of gold from Niblung-land;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>(Among the Huns she thought to divide it with her hand),</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A hundred sumpter horses the load could nowise bear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This tale about Kriemhilda was brought to Hagen's ear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Quoth he: " Because Kriemhilda will ne'er to me be kind,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The gold that once was Siegfried's, she needs must leave behind</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Why should I such a treasure unto my foes let go?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right well I know what Kriemhild with all this gold will do.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"For if she hence should bring it, I'll wager verily</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'T would be in largesse given to stir up hate for me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They have not e'en the horses to carry it away.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Tis Hagen's will to keep it, thus unto Kriemhild' say."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now when she heard this message, smit to the heart was she.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The word was likewise carried unto the kings all three.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fain would they have gainsaid it, but as this did no good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sir Riideger the noble outspake in joyous mood:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"O, mighty Queen, and noble, why grieve ye for this gold?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When unto you king Etzel such kindliness doth hold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That when his eyes behold you, he'll give such riches rare</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That you can never spend it: that, lady, will I swear."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To him the queen made answer: " Most noble Riideger,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Never had a king's daughter more wealth bequeath'd to her</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than that of which Sir Hagen hath now despoiled me."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then went her brother Gernot unto the treasury.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>By right the king's key took he and put it in the door:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And gold therefrom withdrew they, that was of Kriemhild's store;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of marks full thirty thousand or something more they had:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He bade the guests to take it: and Gunther was right glad.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then he from Bechelaren, dame Gotelinda's lord,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Said: " If my lady Kriemhild yet owned all the hoard</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Such as it was aforetime when brought from Niblung-land,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor I, nor the queen either, would touch it with our hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now back let it be taken, for of it will I naught;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sufficient from my country, ay, of mine own, I brought,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That we can do without it right well upon the way,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all our homeward charges right royally can pay."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto that end her maidens had meanwhile pieces told</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Into a dozen coffers, all of the finest gold</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ever one might meet with: these with them they would bear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ornaments for ladies upon the road to wear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The mastery of grim Hagen seem'd overpowering.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Some thousand marks still had she left from the almsgiving.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For her dear husband's welfare the whole did she dispart;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Riideger but deem'd it done with a right true heart.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said the weeping lady: " Where are those friends of mine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who for my sake are willing in banishment to pine?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who unto the Huns' land will bear me company?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Let them take of my treasure and horse and raiment buy."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Eckewart the margrave, made answer to the queen:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"So long as in your household a servant I have been</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right truly have I served you," thus did the warrior say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Nor will I cease to do so until my dying day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And of my men five hundred eke will I bring with me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whom I unto your service do pledge right faithfully.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For nothing shall divide us, till Death our lives do part."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She bent her head to thank him: too full was her sad heart.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then led they forth the palfreys, for it was time to go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her friends all fell a-weeping, and many tears did flow.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble lady Ute and many a maiden fair</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Show'd that for dame Kriemhilda their hearts were full of care.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>A hundred highborn maidens along with her she led,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who as their rank befitted were all apparelled.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then from their eyes bright-shining did many a tear-drop well.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And yet with Etzel later much pleasure them befell.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Lord Giselher came also and Gernot none the less,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With many of their household, as bade their courtliness.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They would their well-loved sister upon her journey bring.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They led a thousand warriors, a goodly following.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The ever-ready Gere, and Ortwein also came;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Rumold the kitchen-master he too must come with them.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Night-quarters made they ready hard by the Danube side.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But Gunther from the city did but a small space ride.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Ere from the Rhine they journey'd they had before them sent</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their messengers, who swiftly unto the Huns' land went,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And told the king beforehand how Riideger had done,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And as a wife for Etzel the noble queen had won.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
