<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XVI: How Siegfried Was Slain</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Siegfried Was Slain</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>916</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>King Gunther now and Hagen, those knights exceeding bold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had treacherously plotted a woodland hunt to hold.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With lances sharp pursuing the boar in forest free.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The wild bull and the bear too: what bolder sport could be?</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With them rode Siegfried also, in honourable mind.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They carried food, too, with them, and that in divers kind.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hard by a cool spring was he foredoom'd to lose his life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And this was by the counsel of Brunhild, Gunther's wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>First went the bold thane thither where he Kriemhilda found,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Already on pack-horses his hunting-gear was bound,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And that of his companions: to cross the Rhine they meant,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Kriemhilda ne'er before had such reason to lament.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And then his own beloved he on the mouth did kiss:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"God grant that I may find thee, my wife, safe, after this;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And that thine eyes may see me! With good friends, till I come</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Beguile the time of waiting, I may not bide at home."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now thought she of the secret she had to Hagen told :—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She did not dare to own it,—nor longer could withhold</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble queen lamenting that she had e'er been born!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For thus with grief unmeasured did Siegfried's fair wife mourn.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She spake unto the warrior: " Ah, let your hunting be!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Last night I had an ill dream: two wild boars I did see</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That chased you o'er the moorland: the flowers grew red as blood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If I do weep thus sorely, 'tis that I bode no good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I have a sore misgiving that there may be some plot:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whether some grudge be owed us for service rendered not,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which may be bringing on us dire hate and enmity?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Go not, dear lord, I beg thee in truth and honesty."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"My love, in but a few days again I shall be here.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor know I of these people one who ill-will doth bear;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To me at all times friendly are all thy kith and kin:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor by these warriors elsewise entreated have I been."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>924.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Nay, nay, my dear lord Siegfried, I bode thy fate too well:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Last night my evil dreaming told how upon thee fell</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Two mountains in the valley; I saw thee never more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If thou wilt thus forsake me, 'twill wound me to the core."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>His wife so good and loving he in his arms did press,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And cherish'd her fair body with kisses numberless;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then took his last leave of her, and tore himself away;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alas, no more she saw him alive after that day!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now rode they forth and came to a deep and shady wood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For sake of sport, and many a warrior bold and good</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Did follow after Gunther and with his sportsmen roam.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But Giselher and Gernot, they two remained at home.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And many horses, laden with stores of bread and wine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Provided for the huntsmen, went forward o'er the Rhine;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Both fish and flesh they carry, and many another cate</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Such as a king so wealthy might duly have to eat.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They ordered their encampment, these hunters proud, hard by</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The greenwood's skirts, where mostly the quarry's runs did lie</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which they to hunt were minded; 'twas on an eyot broad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thither too came Siegfried: as straight the king had word.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The hunters then appointed the watchers where to take</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their places at the openings. Then he, the bold man, spake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Siegfried the ever-stalwart, " Who leads us through the wood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To show us where the game is, ye valiant thanes and good? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Suppose we part," quoth Hagen, " or ever we begin</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To beat about the forest to see what is therein.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That I and these my masters may reason have to know</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who are the better sportsmen that on this chase do go.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"The beaters and the hounds too, we'll evenly divide:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus each his choice may follow where'er he please to ride.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then he who is best sportsman shall have our thanks therefore."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So spake he, and the hunters together stay'd no more.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then said the noble Siegfried: " The hounds I value not,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Save but a single setter, who such a scent hath got</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he the track will follow where'er the game hath led;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Here's to a merry hunting! " Kriemhilda's husband said.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon an aged huntsman took with him a sleuth-hound.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And brought the noble hunters to where much game they found</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Without too long a-seeking. The comrades then did hunt</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whatever broke from covert, as sportsmen keen are wont.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whate'er the setter mark'd him, that slew with his own hand</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Siegfried the doughty hero, who came from Netherland.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His steed so swiftly bore him, that naught could him outrun;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Praise above all the others upon this chase he won.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In all he put his hand to alert he was enow;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of all the beasts, the first one that he to death did do</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>An ox was, strong and savage, that with his hand he fell'd;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And then he, on a sudden, a lion grim beheld.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>E'en as the hound aroused it he with his bow let fly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On which a sharpen'd arrow he'd fitted hastily.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>After the shot the lion but three bounds further ran;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereon his hunting comrades to thank Siegfried began.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There after he an elk slew, and then a buffalo,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And then four sturdy bisons, a savage stag also.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His steed so swiftly bore him that naught could get away:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of harts and hinds scarce any there were he fail'd to slay.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>A huge wild boar the sleuth-hound had routed from his lair.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And when to flee he turn'd him right in his path was there</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The hero of the hunting, all ready for the fight;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The savage brute did straightway charge at the valiant knight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>This boar Kriemhilda's husband then with his broadsword slew:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The like no other huntsman so easily could do.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And when he thus had felled him, they put in leash the hound:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His goodly spoils were talk'd of all Burgundy around.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake to him his huntsmen: " If 'tis for us to say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Leave us, we pray, Lord Siegfried, a few live beasts to slay!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To-day thou hast made empty for us both wood and wold."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thereat he fell to smiHng that worthy thane and bold.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then suddenly, on all sides, were heard great noise and cries.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From dogs and men together such tumult did arise</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That all the woodland echoed, and eke the mountain-side</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For four-and-twenty leash-hounds the hunters had untied.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then many a forest creature must unto death be done,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since every hunter fancied that he might be the one</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To win the prize for hunting: but no award could be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until beside the camp-fire stout Siegfried they did see.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The hunting, though 'twas over, was not yet brought to end:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For some, with burdens laden, to camp their way did wend.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of beast fells bringing many, and game a goodly store.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What piles of it for cooking the king's camp-servants bore!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then to the high-born hunters the king would have it known</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he to dine was ready. Then all at once was blown</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A hunting-horn, right loudly, that all might know around</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That now the noble princes would at the camp be found.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Quoth one of Siegfried's huntsmen: " Sir, I have heard but now,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By sounding of a horn, that 'tis time for us to go</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Back to the camp: in answer I will my bugle wind."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then went the loud blasts flying their followers to find.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the noble Siegfried: " Now let us leave the wood 1 "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His hunter bore him smoothly: and all in haste they rode.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They startled, with their clatter, a grisly brute and grim,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A savage bear. Then, turning to those who followed him,</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The thane cried: " Now our comrades a little fun shall share!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Loose from the leash the setter; yonder I spy a bear;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll see that he goes with us from here unto the camp.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He never can escape us, however fast he tramp! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They loosed the hound, and swiftly the bear before them hied.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then thought Kriemhilda's husband close after him to ride;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But to a ground-rift came he, whereby it could not be;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The sturdy beast made certain 'twas from the huntsmen free.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The proud knight, from his charger, sprang down upon the sward:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And straight began to chase it; the beast was off its guard.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And could not now outrun him: the hero clasp'd it round.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, in a trice, unwounded, he held it tightly bound.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The man it was not able to scratch or bite one jot!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He bound it to his saddle, then promptly up he got.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the camp he bore it,—a prize of hardihood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which all was but a pastime to that knight bold and good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>How noble was his bearing as into camp he rode!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His spear was very mighty, and thereto stout and broad.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right down unto the rowel a handsome long-sword hung:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And a fair horn around him of ruddy gold was slung.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Of better hunting-habit I never have been told.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In tunic of black velvet there was he to behold;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A riding-cap of sable, handsome enough, he wore;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, and what broider'd fillets he on his quiver bore I</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Upon it there was fitted a cap of panther's hide,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Because of its sweet odour. He carried at his side</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A bow, such that it needed,—to draw it to the full,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A hand-winch, when another save he himself did pull.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And then his nether garments of otter-skin were made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From head to foot his raiment with tufts was overlaid.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, 'mid the sleek fur, many a thread of golden twine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of this bold champion-hunter on either side did shine.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And Balmung bore he also,—a handsome blade and broad,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That was so sharp, moreover, its edge was never scored</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When helms by it were dinted; and either edge was keen.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ne'er had that noble huntsman of gayer spirit been.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Since I have undertaken the story to declare,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I must tell how his quiver was fill'd with arrows rare;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The shafts of them were golden, the points a hand-breadth wide.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whate'er with them he pierced, surely and swiftly died.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So rode the noble hero in all his hunting gear;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Gunther's men espied him as he to them drew near.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They hurried out to meet him, and led his horse along.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There lay across his saddle the bear so huge and strong.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As soon as he alighted he loosed the binding thong</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From off its paws and muzzle; then yelpings loud and long</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of hounds arose, so soon as afoot the bear appear'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The brute would to the forest: the folk were fairly scared.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The bear, through all the shouting, into the kitchen ramp'd:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hey, how the frighted scullions from round the fire decamp'd!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The kettles toppled over, the burning sticks were drown'd:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hey, what a store of victuals lay in the ashes round!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Quick from their seats upsprang they, the masters and the men.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The bear began a-growling: the king gave orders then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To let loose all the hound-pack, that in their leashes lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had it herewith but ended that were a merry day!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With bows and spears provided they stay'd no longer there,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But off the swift ones started to follow up the bear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet no one shot: so closely the dogs were thronging round.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The shouting of the people made hill and dale resound.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With all the pack behind him the bear began to race,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But, save Kriemhilda's husband, no one could match its pace.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He quickly ran upon it, and with a sword-stroke slew.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then to the camp-fire, slaughter'd, the grisly brute they drew.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And all who saw, were saying he was a mighty man.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The hunters proud were summon'd, and then the feast began.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon a fair green meadow, a goodly crowd they sate;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ha, 'twas a royal banquet these haughty hunters ate!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The cupbearers still came not, who were the wine to bring,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No heroes ever better deserved such off'ering;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had there not been in secret such treacherous intent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then free had been those warriors of all disparagement.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the noble Siegfried: "I marvel much hereat;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since from the kitchen plenty of food they send to eat,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Why come not the cupbearers to bring us also wine?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Let them treat hunters better, or 'tis no sport of mine!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I have deserved that people more care of me should take."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The king then from the table, in answer, falsely spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"However we have blunder'd we'll mend it by-and-by;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Tis all the fault of Hagen, who'd have us all go dry."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Hagen spake, of Tronje: " My dear lord list to me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I reckon'd that the hunting to-day was fix'd to be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right over in the Spessart, so sent the wine-flasks there.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If we to-day go thirsty, next time I'll take more care! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then answer'd the lord Siegfried: " Small thanks, methinks, are thine!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Seven sumpters' burden should they of mead and unmix'd wine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Have hither sent to meet us; or were that hard to do.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They should have pitch'd our quarters more nigh the Rhine unto."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake Hagen of Tronje: "Ye noble knights and bold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I know that here hard by is a spring of water cold,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Pray be ye not offended,—'tis thither we should go."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To many a thane this counsel was fraught with mickle woe,</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With pangs of thirst was Siegfried the warrior sorely smit:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The sooner then the table he gave them word to quit;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Along the hill-side would he unto the fountain wend.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus what the knights had plotted drew on towards its end.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The game that had been slaughter'd by Siegfried's cunning hand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They bade men pile on wagons, and carry through the land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And everyone who saw it his praise and honour spake.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right grievously did Hagen his troth to Siegfried break.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whilst to the shady lindens they were upon their way,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Cried Hagen, lord of Tronje: " Oft have I heard men say</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That to Kriemhilda's husband no one a match could be</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When he would show his paces: ay! will he let us see! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the Netherlander Siegfried, the valiant:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Now is the time for trying, if ye a wager want,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From here unto the fountain; so soon as it be done</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The onlookers shall settle which is the foremost one."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now verily we'll try it," the warrior Hagen said.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then quoth the stalwart Siegfried: " If ye come in ahead,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before your feet I'll lay me full length upon the grass."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When Gunther heard the promise, how glad at heart he was!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the bold thane further: "Yet something more I'll say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'll carry all the clothing that I have worn to-day,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My spear and eke my buckler, and all my hunting gear."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His sword and quiver bound he around him then and there.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But they, the king and Hagen, their upper clothes did doff:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In two white shirts one saw them stand ready to be off.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As fleet as two wild panthers they through the clover ran:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet at the spring bold Siegfried came in the foremost man.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In all he put his hand to he won the prize from all.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Straightway his sword he loosen'd and let his quiver fall;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Against a bough of linden he let his stout spear rest;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Close by the flowing fountain now stood the stately guest.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And herein also Siegfried did manifest his worth:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He laid his shield beside him where flow'd the fountain forth,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But, greatly as he thirsted, the hero tasted not</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before the king had drunken: base thanks from him he got.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Cool was the spring of water, and clean, and bright, and good;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Gunther bent him downwards to the refreshing flood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As soon as he had quenched his thirst, away he came;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then ready was bold Siegfried and would have done the same.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>His courtesy and breeding, then met with their reward:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For Hagen to the background withdrew his bow and sword.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then back again ran quickly to where he found the spear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And looked to find a token the hero's coat did bear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And whilst the noble Siegfried drank of the rippling flood</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He stabb'd him through the cross-mark, and through the wound his blood</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Straight from his heart outspurted, and Hagen's shirt was wet;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So foul a misdeed never befell a hero yet.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He left the lance within him close to his heart stuck tight;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And grimly then did Hagen betake himself to flight,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As in his life he never from mortal man did flee.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The stalwart Siegfried, feeling how sorely smit was he.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>All madly from the fountain in rage and anguish sprang,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whilst from between his shoulders a long lance-shaft did hang.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The chieftain thought to find there his bow, or else his sword:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then verily had Hagen not gone without reward.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But when the knight sore-wounded his sword had fail'd to find,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And saw that they had left him naught save his shield behind,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He gripp'd it from the well's side, and after Hagen ran:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then vainly to escape him essay'd King Gunther's man.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Though he to death was wounded, so mightily smote he,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That from the hero's buckler there fell abundantly</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The precious stones that deck'd it; the shield itself did break;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble guest his vengeance was fain enow to wreak.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Yet by his hand must Hagen lie stretch'd upon the ground.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So hard, in sooth, his blows were, they made the glebe resound.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had he his sword had handy, then Hagen had been slain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The wound was burning sorely, and made him writhe with pain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>His cheeks had lost their colour; no longer stand could he.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all his strength of body was failing utterly;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Death's sign upon his forehead in pallid hue he bore:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fair women soon were mourning for him with weeping sore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then fell Kriemhilda's husband upon the flowery sward:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One saw from out the lance-wound, how fast his life-blood pour'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upbraiding then began he,—forced by his mortal pain,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Those who had thus betray'd him and treacherously slain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Ye perjured, lying cowards," the dying warrior said,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"What hath avaiFd my service, since thus ye strike me dead?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To you aye was I faithful: and thus do ye repay!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Your kith and kin shall suffer for what yeVe wrought this day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"The children born unto ye shall be, from this day forth,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For evermore accursed, for ye have wreak'd your wrath,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And vengeance all too sorely upon my body done:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now ye, with scorn and hatred, all worthy knights shall shun."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The knights all ran together to where he stricken lay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To many a man among them it was a joyless day.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who had aught of honour sore lamentation made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From all he well deserved it, this hero undismay'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king of the Burgundians mourn'd also for his death.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the dying chieftain: " Small need is there, in faith,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he who work'd the evil should grieve that it be done:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Much blame he hath deserved: 'twere better left alone! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Grim Hagen spake to Gunther: " What art thou weeping for?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For done is our vexation and all our sorrows o'er:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>We shall find few henceforward who 'gainst us dare to stand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Glad am I that his kingship hath perish'd by my hand! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"'Tis easy now to vaunt ye," said Siegfried, in reply,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"If I had known beforehand your deadly enmity,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alone would I against ye have well maintain'd my life:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For naught grieve I so sorely as for Kriemhild, my wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And now must God forgive me, that I a son did get</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whom folks shall taunt in future and let him not forget</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That kin of his by some one was murderously slain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If that avail'd," said Siegfried, " right well might I complain.''</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Yet once more spake the hero, in anguish nigh to death:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"If thou, O king most noble, art willing to hold faith</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With any living being, I fain would now consign</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto your grace avid favour, that well-loved wife of mine.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And let her from this profit, that thou her brother art:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If there is faith in princes, stand by her with true heart.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My father and my liegemen must tarry long for me;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ne'er worse to any woman could loss of dear friend be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>All round about, the flowers were wetted with his blood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As now with Death he struggled: nor long the strife withstood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alas, the deadly weapon too well had done its part!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then mote he speak no further, that warrior of bold heart.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And when the nobles saw that the hero was quite dead,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon a shield they laid him, that was of wrought gold red;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And straightway held they counsel how they might best take heed</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From all to keep it hidden that Hagen did the deed.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then divers of them counsell'd: " Woe hath befallen us.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But ye must all conceal it, and tell the story thus:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>' As Dame Kriemhilda's husband alone a-hunting rode.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Some vagabonds set on him and slew him in the wood.' "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake of Tronje Hagen: " Myself I'll take him home,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It matters not to me that the truth to her should come:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Brunhilda's mind hath sorely by her been harassed,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It troubles me but little what tears she now may shed! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
