<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXXVI: How the Queen Bade That the Hall Be Set on Fire</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-36" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How the Queen Bade That the Hall Be Set on Fire</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now do ye off your helmets," quoth Hagen, the bold knight,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"For I and my companion will guard ye all aright.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And should the men of Etzel a fresh attack essay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So will I warn my masters with all the speed I may."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The head was then uncover'd of many a warrior good;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They sat upon the fallen, who lay there steep'd in blood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And had to death been smitten so lately by their hand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By many evil glances the noble guests were scann'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Before the fall of evening the king his measures took,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The queen thereto assenting,—that with some better luck</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The Hunnish knights might venture. Full twenty thousand men</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were seen before him standing: to battle must they, then.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon with furious onslaught the strangers were attack'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Dankwart, Hagen's brother, a man right swift to act,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sprang from his lords, the foemen before the door to rout;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It seem'd that he must perish, but safely gat he out.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The deadly struggle lasted till stay'd it was by night.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As well became good heroes, the guests maintained the fight</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Against the men of Etzel one whole long summer day.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ah, what gallant warriors about them dying lay!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas at the summer solstice this slaughter great befell,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby the Dame Kriemhilda avenged her heart-ache well</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon her nearest kinsfolk and many another wight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From that time royal Etzel knew nevermore delight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The day for them was ended in great anxiety.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It seem'd to them 'twere better a speedy death to die,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than linger there, awaiting some dread, unheard-of pain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Therefore the haughty warriors to beg a truce were fain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king, by word, besought they to come unto them there.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These heroes, blood-bespatter'd and soil'd with armour-wear,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From out the palace follow'd the noble kings all three;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They knew not to what hearer to plead their misery.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Both Etzel and Kriemhilda came thither them before.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The land was their possession: their host grew more and more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The king spake to the strangers: " Say, what will ye of me?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A truce ye would be granted? Such thing can hardly be</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"After such insult grievous as ye on me have cast,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>(Nor shall ye profit by it if life for me should last)</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My child, that ye have slain me, and many of my kin.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Peace and atonement, surely, ye cannot hope to win! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Whereto made answer Gunther: " By dire need we were led.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My people all were lying before thy heroes dead</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Within the hostel yonder: what pretext did I lend?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To thee in good faith came I, I thought thou wert my friend."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Giselher, the youngest of the Burgundian three:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Ye chiefs," cried he, " of Etzel, who living yet may be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How have I wrong'd ye, warriors? In what am I to blame?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto this country riding in kindly mood I came."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They answer'd: " Every city throughout the land with woe</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Is fill'd through this thy kindness. Ay, glad were we, I trow,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If thou hadst ne'er come hither from Worms beyond the Rhine.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The country thou hast orphan'd, with brothers twain of thine."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon, in wrathful humour, Gunther the warrior spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"If of this bitter hatred an ending ye would make</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With us, unhappy strangers, 'twere better for us both I</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Tis for no fault on our part what Etzel to us doth."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then to the guests the host said: " Your troubles and my own</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Are nowise to be liken'd. The burden on me thrown</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of shame and loss together which I have had to bear;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For this not one among you hence with his life shall fare."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon the stalwart Gernot made answer to the king:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"So then may God incline you to do a friendly thing!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>An ye must slay us strangers, then let us come to you</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From here unto the open. Thus honour bids you do.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Whate'er to us may happen, be it done out of hand!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So many whole men have ye who us will dare withstand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That none of us, strife-weary, alive they'll let away.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For how long are we warriors in this distress to stay? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The warriors of Etzel would have agreed thereto</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they outside the palace be granted leave to go.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But when Kriemhilda heard it, sorely aggrieved was she.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then for the outcast strangers no hope of peace could be.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Nay, nay, ye Hunnish warriors, the thing ye have in thought,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In good faith I advise ye—see that ye do it not.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These murder-wreaking fellows let not without the hall,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Else shall right deadly sorrows upon your kinsmen fall.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Though not another living save Ute's sons there were—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>These same, my noble brothers—and they but to the air</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Came out to cool their hauberks, your hope were all forlorn;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>More valiant warriors never into this world were born."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Giselher, the youngest, said: " Fairest sister mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right ill I did to trust you, when from beyond the Rhine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto this land thou bad'st me into this direful strait.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How have I from the Hunsfolk deserved this cruel fate?</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"To thee I e'er was faithful, I never did thee hurt.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And on the understanding I hither rode to court</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That thou, most noble sister, wert well-disposed to me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Be merciful towards us: not elsewise can it be! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I cannot show you mercy; unmerciful am I.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For me hath Tronian Hagen wrought so much misery</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It may not be atoned for as long as I have life.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ye all must pay the forfeit; " so answer'd Etzel's wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Yet will ye Hagen only to me as hostage give,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I will not say for certain I may not let you live,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Seeing ye are my brothers and of one mother bred;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then with these chiefs assembled I may of pardon rede."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now God in Heaven forefend it! " Gernot in answer said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Were there a thousand of us, we sooner all were dead—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Though of thy kith and kindred—ere we gave up to thee</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A single man as hostage: nay, that can never be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>'Then are we doom'd to perish! " made answer Giselher;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Yet no one shall deprive us of any knightly gear.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Here, as before, abide we, would any us assail,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For ne'er to any comrade did I in fealty fail."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the gallant Dankwart (by him 'twas meetly done):</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"In sooth my brother Hagen standeth not yet alone!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who a truce deny us may yet have cause to rue;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of that we'll make you certain,—take ye my word as true! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The queen spake to her warriors: " Ye men of courage high,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Go closer to the stairway, avenge mine injury!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then will I be your debtor, as I by all means should.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I would requite on Hagen his overweening mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Let no man leave the palace, I charge ye above all;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I will, at the four corners, have fire set to the hall:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So all the wrongs I've sufifer'd right well avenged shall be/'</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The warriors of Etzel were ready speedily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Those that without were standing they drave the hall within</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By smiting and by shooting; and fearful was the din.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet never would the princes their faithful men forsake;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their fealty to each other could neither of them break.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Etzel's wife gave bidding to set alight the hall.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so with fire were tortured those warriors' bodies all.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Caught by the wind, the palace was presently aflame;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ween that people never to such dire anguish came.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Oh, woe upon this horror! " cried many a one inside:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"For us it had been better had we in battle died.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>May God have pity on us! lost evermore are we!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On us the queen her anger now wreaks infernally."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Quoth one within the palace: " Needs must we all lie dead!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What profits us the greeting that from the king we had?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The burning heat so sorely with thirst doth torture me,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I trow that in this torment my life will quickly flee."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Hagen spake, of Tronjd: "Ye noble knights and good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whoe'er by thirst is troubled may quench it here with blood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In heat like this 'tis better than wine of any kind,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And at this time, moreover, no better may ye find."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So went one of the warriors to where a corpse he found:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He knelt to where the wound was, his helmet he unbound,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And then he fell to drinking the oozing stream of blood;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unused as he was to it, he thought it passing good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Requite thee God, Sir Hagen," that man so weary spake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Seeing that thou hast taught me so well my thirst to slake!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A better wine right seldom hath been pour'd out for me.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Live I for some while longer, I'll aye be bound to thee."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The rest being told about it, and how he found it good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then were there many others who also drank the blood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thereby each one among them began to gain new life—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In dear ones it was paid for by many a goodly wife.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Within the hall about them the sparks fell thick around,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon their shields they caught them and turn'd them to the ground.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The fire and smoke together distress'd them terribly.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I trow that heroes never felt greater misery.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Tronian Hagen shouted: " Stand closer to the wall!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Let not the burning embers upon your helm-bands fall,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But in the blood more deeply trample them with your feet:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>This feast the queen hath made us is but a sorry treat! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In such distressful doings the night to ending wore,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And still the gallant minstrel kept watch the house before</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With Hagen his companion; upon their shields they leant,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From Etzel's folk awaiting some further detriment.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the fiddle-player: " Now go we to the hall:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So shall the Huns imagine that each of us and all</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Have perish'd in this torture that hath on us been done;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet shall they see us meet them, in battle, everyone."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Giselher, the youngest of the Burgundians, spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"A cool wind is arising, I trow the day will break.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now grant us, God of Heaven, on better times to fall!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For us my sister Kriemhild hath made ill festival."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake there yet another: "The dawning I can see;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And since for us naught better is ever like to be,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Do on your armour, heroes; see to your safety all;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>King Etzel's wife, I doubt not, will quickly on us fall."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The host might well imagine that all the guests were slain</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By dint of all their labours, or by the fiery pain;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet still of them were living six hundred gallant wights,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than whom no king whatever had any better knights.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They who the strangers guarded had fail'd not to espy</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That still the guests were living, in spite of injury</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And pains that had befallen the lords and liegemen too;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Quite sound they saw them pacing the chamber to and fro.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>'Twas told unto Kriemhilda that they were safe and well.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereto the queen made answer: " It ne'er were possible</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That through the fiery torment any of them have stay'd!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I'd rather take for granted that all of them lie dead."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The princes and their liegemen were fain enough to live,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Had anyone been willing mercy to them to give.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>None could they find of any within the Hunnish land!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So to avenge their dying they sought with willing hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Towards the dawn of morning, they had, for greeting fair,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A dire assault of battle -. in straits the heroes were.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Though thickly all amongst them stout javelins were thrown.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The brave and noble warriors like true knights held their own.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The zeal of Etzel's people was quicken'd by desire,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they from Queen Kriemhilda might earn the promised hire;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Moreover they were eager to do the king's command.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And so no few among them found speedy death at hand.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Of promising and giving might wondrous tales be told.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She bade her folk on bucklers to bring the ruddy gold;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She gave to all who craved it and would accept her fee.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! ne'er was greater guerdon spent for an enemy.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>A mighty force of warriors came in their panoply.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To them cried gallant Volker: " Here waiting still are we!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I ne'er saw knights more gladly go forth to face the foe</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than these who the king's bounty have taken, for our woe."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then many of them shouted: " Come nigh, ye heroes, pray,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That we may have our ending,—ay, come without delay!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Here none there are remaining but have been doom'd to die! '</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With shafts one saw their bucklers all bristling speedily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>What have I more to tell you? A good twelve hundred men</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Made onset sore upon them, again and yet again.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The strangers cool'd their fury by wounding many a one—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No truce could be between them; one saw the life blood run</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>From wounds of deadly deepness; and many were there slain \</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And every man among them one heard for friends complain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The mighty king and noble lost all his bravest there,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For whom their loving kinsfolk sore sorrow had to bear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
