<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXVI: How Gelfrat Was Slain by Dankwart</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-26" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Gelfrat Was Slain by Dankwart</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they were all come over unto the further strand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The king began to question: " Who will throughout this land</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Show us the proper pathways,—lest we should stray afar? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the valiant Volker: " Alone for that I'll care."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now bide ye yet," said Hagen, " if squire you be or knight,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A friend's word should be follow'd; that seems to me but right.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I have unwelcome tidings to make known unto ye:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No more shall we return to the land of Burgundy 1</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"To-day, at early morning, told me mermaidens two,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That we should home return not. Now rede I what to do:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Look to your weapons, heroes, ye needs must well beware;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Here have we mighty foemen, and warily must fare.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I thought to catch her lying, that wily mermaiden:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She swore that none among us should ever come again</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alive unto our country, except the priest alone:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whom therefore I this morning have done my best to drown."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then quickly flew these tidings, from troop to troop they spread;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From the keen heroes' faces for grief the colour fled;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To sorrow then began they that this court-ride should lead</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To bitter death as ending: in sooth, they had good need.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Nigh Moeringen the place was where they the flood had cross'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The ferryman of Else there, too, his life had lost.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thereupon said Hagen: " Seeing that I have made</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Foes on the road, I doubt not that we shall be waylaid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"To-day that self-same boatman at early dawn I slew;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ye know right well the story. Now buckle quickly to,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That if this day should Gelfrat or Else here essay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To fall upon our people, they shall the damage pay.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"For such bold men I know ye, this cannot fail to be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Twere well to let your horses, therefore, go quietly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That none should deem we're passing along the roads in flight."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"That counsel will I follow," said Giselher the knight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"But who shall now our people across the country show? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They answer'd: " That shall Volker, for right well doth he know</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The highways and the byways, a gallant minstrel he."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Before their wish was utter'd, the fiddler they could see</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Standing well-arm'd before them. He bound his helmet on,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And on his battle-mantle the glorious colour shone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As signal, on a lance-shaft, a pennon red he bore.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But with the kings, thereafter, he fell on trouble sore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile the boatman's murder became to Gelfrat known</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By message all undoubted; and eke the news had gone</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Else the most mighty; and sore aggrieved were they.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They sent to call their chieftains, who came without delay.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In space of time the shortest,—I would to you make known,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Were seen unto them riding men, who erewhile had done</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sore scathe and dread achievements in direst stress of war.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of such there came to Gelfrat seven hundred men or more.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Their foemen fierce to challenge to ride they then began,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Led by their lords aforesaid. Too readily they ran</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To catch the doughty strangers and wipe away their shame.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of their retainers many by death thereafter came.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Meanwhile, Hagen of Tronje for that had taken care;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>(How could a hero better for all his friends beware?)</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Together with his liegemen the watch by night kept he,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>As did his brother Dankwart: 'twas done right prudently.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The day its course had ended and light they had no more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He fear'd for friends and comrades with heavy dread and sore.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their road throughout Bavaria beneath their shields they track'd.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And ere they long had ridden the heroes were attack'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>On both sides of the roadway behind them, coming fast,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They heard the tramp of horse-hoofs, too noisy in their haste.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the gallant Dankwart: " Here will they fall on us!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Now fasten on your helmets,—'twere wise to wait them thus."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They halted on their journey, naught else was to be done.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They saw how in the darkness the polish'd bucklers shone,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until at last would Hagen no longer brook delay:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Who hunts us on the highway? " to him must Gelfrat say.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In this wise then the Margrave—he of Bavaria—spake:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Our foemen we are seeking, and now are on their track.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I know not who hath slain me my ferryman this day,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He was a skilful hero, and sorrow well I may."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>To him spake he of Tronje: " And was that boatman thine?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He would not take us over. The guilt thereof is mine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For then I slew the warrior; in sooth, there was good need,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since at his hands I elsewise had got my death instead.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I offer'd him for guerdon good gold and raiment fine</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To ferry us, O hero! unto this land of thine,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which anger'd him so sorely that he at me a blow</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Aim'd with a sturdy barge-pole; then I grew fierce enow,</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"And clutching at my broadsword, I paid him back again</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With blows that deeply wounded; so was the hero slain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Amends therefore I'll make thee, howe'er thou thinkest good."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then fell the two to wrangle: both were of stubborn mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Full well I knew," said Gelfrat, " that when this way did ride</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Gunther and his retainers, much ill would us betide</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Through Hagen, lord of Tronje. Not hence ahve goes he;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For my poor boatman's murder he must the forfeit be."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Above their bucklers bent they their lances for the thrust,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Sir Gelfrat and Sir Hagen; each at the other must.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then Else, too, and Dankwart came riding gallantly,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To try each other's mettle; the fight raged fiercely.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>How otherwise might heroes more featly try their strength?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By a hard lance-thrust smitten Hagen the bold, at length.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From off his horse fell backwards, by Gelfrat's hand laid low</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His saddle-bow was broken and downfall he must know.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Among the yeomen's lances arose a clashing sound.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then up again rose Hagen, who, whilom on the ground</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From Gelfrat's blow, had fallen upon the meadow-grass.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His mood, methinks, to Gelfrat of sort ungentle was.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Who held in charge their horses, that is to me unknown;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The twain were now dismounted and on the sand stood down,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hagen, to wit, and Gelfrat, who at each other flew;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The folk of either aided who of the combat knew.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>How mightfully soever Hagen on Gelfrat leapt,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble margrave parried; and with one stroke he swept</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A great piece off his buckler,—that sparks therefrom were shed;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby King Gunther's vassal was wellnigh stricken dead.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thereon he unto Dankwart to call aloud began:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Dear brother, help me quickly! for, lo, a mighty man</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Hath got me at his mercy; he'll make an end of me! "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the valiant Dankwart: "To that I soon will see."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then nearer sprang the hero and struck so fell a blow</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With keen edge of his weapon, that dead he laid him low.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then fain had Else taken some vengeance for the wight;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But he and all his people went off in sorry plight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>His brother had been slaughter'd; himself, too, had a wound;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Full eighty of his warriors lay there upon the ground</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In grim Death's grip forever; needs must the hero then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Turn round and flee for safety before King Gunther's men.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now while they of Bavaria along the road did flee,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The horrid sounds of slaughter were heard unceasingly.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So did the men of Tronje after their foemen chase.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who of defeat had dreamt not; too soon it came to pass.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And while they still were fleeing, Dankwart the thane call'd out:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Upon the road right quickly we ought to turn about</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And let them run at leisure: all wet they are with blood!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto our friends return we; in sooth I deem it good."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now when they were returned to where the fight had been,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Spake Hagen, lord of Tronj: " Ye heroes, be it seen</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>What damage we have suffer'd, and who to us is lost;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By reason of this battle which Gelfrat's wrath hath cost."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>A loss of four they reckon'd; these must they grieve for well.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But fully they aveng'd were: for against them there fell</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of the Bavarian warriors a hundred men and more;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whereby the Tronians' bucklers were dimm'd and wet with gore.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Just then a gleam of moonlight between the clouds did break.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Now look ye well that no one," so to them Hagen spake,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Betray to my dear masters what we have done this day;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Let them until the morning free from all trouble stay."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they who had been fighting had now caught up the rest,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With weariness the people were grievously distressed.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"How long," were many asking, " must we be riding yet? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And doughty Dankwart answer'd: "No lodging can we get.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Until the dawn of morning ye all must onwards ride."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Volker the quick, who all things did for the folk provide,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Bade some one ask the marshal: "Where shall we go towards,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That we may rest our horses and eke our well-loved lords? "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake the doughty Dankwart: " In sooth I cannot say,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But there must be no resting before the dawn of day;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then, wheresoe'er we find it, upon the grass we'll lie."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Some, when they heard this bidding, were sore aggrieved thereby.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>So were they undiscover'd by the warm blood-stains red,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until the sun uprising with his bright beams had shed</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The day-dawn o'er the mountains; then first the king did see</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That they had fought. The hero spake to them wrathfuUy:</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"How now? ye have, friend Hagen, methinks but small regard</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For this my presence with you, seeing ye thus have dared</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To stain with blood your armour! now who hath done this thing? "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"'Twas Else, who set on us last night," he told the king.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"His ferryman the cause was that we were set upon;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>My brother came, and Gelfrat was by his hand fordone;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then Else fled before us, by direst need bested.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Four men we lost; a hundred of them we left for dead."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The place at which they rested I know not to declare;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But all the country people ere long became aware</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That sons of noble Ute to court were on their way:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And thus a hearty welcome at Passau soon had they.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The Bishop Pilgrin, uncle of these high rulers three,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Was in his heart well-pleased his sister's sons to see,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With such a host of warriors, thus come to his domain.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he meant well unto them, was very quickly plain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Right gladly were they welcomed by friends upon the way;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But since there was at Passau no room for them to stay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They needs must cross the water, where open field they found;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There tents and wooden cabins they set up on the ground.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There must they stay and rest them for space of one whole day</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And eke the night that follow'd. How fairly served were they!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Riideger's dominions thence had they to ride on.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To him the tidings also were very quickly known.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When now the wayworn riders had taken needful rest,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And nearer were approaching the country of their quest,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They found upon the marches a knight who sleeping lay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From whom Hagen of Tronje a stout sword took away.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Ay, Eckewart the name was of that same warrior good;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Much grief had he thereover, and sorry was his mood</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he had lost the weapon through heroes passing there.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>lU-watch'd found they the borders of margrave Riideger.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Woe 's me for this dishonour," thereon said Eckewart,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"This journey of Burgundians I rue with all my heart.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since ever I lost Siegfried, my luck hath all been gone.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Alack, the day, Lord Riideger, what ill to thee I've done! "</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now Hagen heard right plainly the noble warrior's woe.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His sword again he gave him and six red armlets, too.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Take these as pledge, O hero, that thou my friend wilt be;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Good knight thou art, though lonely thou sleptst upon the lea."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"God for thy rings requite thee," said Eckewart thereto;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Thy journey into Hunsland yet sorely do I rue.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thou took'st the life of Siegfried; here art thou held in hate.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To guard thyself be careful: in good faith rede I that."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now God alone must keep us! " Hagen for answer gave.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"In truth no greater trouble these warriors now have</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Than that, for kings and liegemen, on lodgings we may light,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Where we in this same country may lay our heads to-night.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"The horses have been ruin'd by roads so far about; "</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Thus spake the warrior Hagen, " our stores are all run out;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>None can be had for money; a worthy host we need,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who ere this day is ended will kindly give us bread."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Spake Eckewart in answer: " A host to you I'll show:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And such a one ne'er bade you into his house to go,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In any land whatever, as ye may meet with here</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If ye, good thanes are willing to visit Riideger.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"He dwells hard by the highway: of hosts he is the best</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That ever had a rooftree. His heart is aye possest</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of kindness, as of flowers are meadows in sweet May;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If he can succour heroes, glad will he be the day."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Wilt thou then," said King Gunther, " be now my messenger.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And see if for my pleasure, my kind friend Riideger</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Shelter unto my kinsfolk and all our men will give?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So will I do my utmost to serve him while I live."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"I'll gladly be the envoy," then answer'd Eckewart.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With right good will so did he upon the errand start.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Riideger declared he what he was bade to say.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who no such joyful tidings had heard for many a day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Folk saw to Bechelaren a knight ride hastily.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Him Riideger himself saw: " On yonder road," said he,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Comes Eckewart fast riding, of Kriemhild's lieges one."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He fancied that the foemen some harm to him had done.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then went he to the gateway where he the envoy found</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who laid aside his weapon from off his belt unbound.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The message that he carried he sought not to withhold</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From host and friends about him; but straight his story told.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the margrave spake he: "I come at the command</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of Gunther, king and ruler of the Burgundian land,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Giselher his brother, and likewise Gernot, too;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Each of these warriors sendeth his greeting unto you.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"The like doth also Hagen, as Volker doth as well.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With true and ready service. And more I have to tell:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That—as the royal marshal sends word to you by me—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The good men much are needing your hospitality."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With smiling lips unto him made Riideger reply:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Glad am I at your tidings, that kings so great and high</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Deign to bespeak my service: they shall not be denied.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If they will cross my threshold 'twill give me joy and pride."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Dankwart the marshal likewise begs you by me to tell</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If you can furnish house-room for all the rest as well:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For sixty valiant warriors, a thousand knights right good,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And men-at-arms nine thousand?" Then joyful was his mood.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Now be these guests right welcome," made answer Riideger,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"And all these noble warriors, unto my dwelling here;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To them, as yet, at no time have I a service done.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So ride to meet them, kinsmen and lieges everyone."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then quickly to their horses hurried each squire and knight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whate'er their master bade them to all of them seem'd right;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And they in service hasted the readier for that.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Naught wist yet dame Gotlinda, who in her chamber sat.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
