<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure XXI: How Kriemhilda Went to the Huns</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-21" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Adventure</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">How Kriemhilda Went to the Huns</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section>
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Leave we the heralds riding: we must make known to you</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How the Queen's journey prosper'd, as she the land rode through;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And where from her did Gernot and Giselher depart.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right truly each had served her, as taught of faithful heart.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They rode as far as Pfoering, upon the Danube-strand.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then of the queen began they kind quittance to demand,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Since homeward they returning unto the Rhine would ride:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor might this without weeping 'twixt loving friends betide.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Giselher the ready unto his sister said:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"If ever thou, fair lady, shouldst stand in need of aid,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If e'er thou art in danger, fail not to let me know.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Etzel's land to serve thee I presently will go."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Those who were of her kindred upon the mouth she kist;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And at the hour of parting full many a loving tryst</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One saw the liegemen keeping of margrave Riideger:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For many a well-dight maiden the queen led forth with her.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Five score and four in number: rich clothing did they wear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And brightly tinctured cloth-stuffs: and many men did bear</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Broad shields to guard the ladies beside them on the way.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But many a princely warrior must part from them that day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Thence rode they swiftly forward down through Bavarian land.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The people told the tidings of how a mickle band</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Of unknown guests were coming, nigh where a cloister still</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Doth stand, and where Inn river the Danube's flood doth fill.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Within the town of Passau there was a bishop's see.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The hostels and the palace stood empty presently:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To meet the guests men hied them on to Bavarian ground,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Where Pilgerin the bishop the fair Kriemhilda found.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The warriors of the country no whit displeased were</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To see behind her coming so many ladies fair,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their eyes upon these daughters of noble knights did rest.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Good lodging was provided for every noble guest.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The bishop into Passau, his niece beside him, rode;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And when among the burghers the news was noised abroad</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That coming was Kriemhilda, their prince's sister's child.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right gladly was she welcomed by all the merchant guild.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>That they were come to sojourn the bishop fain had known,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But Eckewart said to him: " It is not to be done;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To Riideger's dominions we needs must journey down.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Where many knights await us: as is to all well-known."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The tidings of their coming now fair Gotlinda knew.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Straightway she made her ready, her noble daughter too.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For Riideger had warn'd her that he would deem it good</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If when the queen was coming—to somewhat cheer her mood—</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>She would ride forth to meet her, with escort of his men,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the river Ense; which being accomplished, then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On every side beheld one the very roads alive</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With folk, on foot or horseback,—to see the guests arrive</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Now was the queen by this time to Everdingen come.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>No few of the Bavarians did then as outlaws roam.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To rob upon the highways; and they, as was their wont,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Might to the guests have offer'd some dangerous affront.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>But well the noble margrave of this had taken thought;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For he a thousand warriors and even more had brought.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There also came Gotlinda, the wife of Riideger,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many a knight of valour right nobly rode with her.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they the Traun had traversed, upon the level green</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By Ens, folk making ready cabins and tents were seen;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For there it was determined the night-halt should be made.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>All charges for the strangers by Riideger were paid.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The fair Gotlinda stay'd not upon the camping ground,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But forward went to meet them. Along the roadway wound</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With ever tinkling trappings a handsome cavalcade.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right kindly was her greeting,—which Riideger made glad.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>And those whom either party encounter'd on the way</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Rode in praiseworthy fashion; right many thanes were they.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They practised knightly pastimes, by many a maiden seen;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor was the warriors' service unpleasing to the queen.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As Riideger's retainers unto the guests came nigh,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Right many were the lance-shafts one saw raised up on high.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By warriors' hands upUfted, as is the knightly mode;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And then before the ladies praiseworthily they rode.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>This brought they to an ending; then many of the men</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Greeted each other kindly. The fair Gotlinda then</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To where she saw Kriemhilda they brought upon her way.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They who could serve the ladies had Uttle rest that day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The lord of Bechelaren up to his wife did ride;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble lady-margrave was right well satisfied</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That he from the Rhine country all safe and sound had won.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And somewhat was her sorrow in happiness undone.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When she had made him welcome, he bade her on the green</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Dismount, with all the ladies who in her train were seen.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then many a noble liegeman was busy as could be;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And service to the ladies was done right readily.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>As now the lady Kriemhild the margravine espied,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Standing with her attendants, she would no nearer ride;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But with the rein her palfrey at once began to stay,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And bade them from the saddle to lift her down straightway.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>His sister's daughter leading one saw the bishop soon,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With Eckewart, to make her unto Gotlinda known;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, in a trice, the people made wide the way for this.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Upon the lips the stranger did Gotelinda kiss.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then spake in loving fashion the wife of Riideger:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>"Now well is me, dear lady, that I thy presence fair</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Within my country's borders and with mine eyes have seen.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To me could at this season no greater joy have been."</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>"Most noble Gotelinda, God give you your reward!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>If haply I," spake Kriemhild, " and Botlung's son be spared,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>One day you may be joyful that you have seen my face."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They both were all unknowing of what must come to pass.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Due courtesies exchanging, walk'd many maidens fair;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Their services to render the warriors ready were.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They sat, the greetings ended, upon the clover down,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And many made acquaintance, who were till then unknown.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Wine brought they for the ladies; and now 'twas full midday;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble folk would therefore no longer there delay.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They rode on till they came where large huts and many stood,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And for the noble strangers was waiting service good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>That night they slept in quiet until the dawning brake.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But they of Bechelaren themselves did ready make,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>So that they might provide for so many a worthy guest.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Well Riideger had managed that little should be miss'd.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>One saw how every window stood open in the wall:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The castle of Bechlaren was entry-free to all.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Therein the guests came riding, well seen of all around.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble host had bidden good hostel to be found.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Then Riideger's fair daughter with all her company,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the queen approaching, received her lovingly.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There likewise was her mother, the wife of the margrave.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To many a young damsel they kindly greeting gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Hands took they with each other, and so together went</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto a wide-room'd palace of fashion excellent.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>For there, beneath it rushing, one saw the Danube's flood.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>They sat and took the breezes, and had much pastime good.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Of what they did there further I cannot say a word.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That so much time was wasted complaints, howe'er, were heard,—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Made by Kriemhilda's warriors, whose patience thus was tried.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But with them, from Bechlaren what goodly thanes did ride!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>By Riideger kind service was amply offered.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The queen bestow'd, when leaving, twelve golden bracelets red</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>On Gotelinda's daughter, and raiment, too, well-wrought:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>She into Etzel's country herself no better brought.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Although they had despoil'd her of all the Niblung gold,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The love of all who saw her she knew to win and hold</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With what small wealth remaining she for her use might have.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto her host's house-servants great store of gifts she gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Like honour show'd on her side the lady Gotelind</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the guests from Rhineland; to whom she was so kind</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That one could find scarce any among the strangers there</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Who had not of her jewels or raiment fine to wear.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>When they enough had eaten, and time it was to start,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The mistress of the household proffer'd, with all her heart,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Most true and loyal service to Etzel's wife to-be.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then was the fair young maiden embraced right lovingly.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the Queen thus spake she: " If it seem good to you,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>I know that my dear father right gladly this will do:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>He'll send me into Hunsland that I with you may be."</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That she was loyal-hearted Kriemhilda well could see.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>In front of Bechelaren the horses had been led;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The noble queen already her parting words had said</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the wife and daughter of margrave Riideger;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>With greetings, too, departed full many a maiden fair.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>They scarce from that day forward saw one another more.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And when they came to Medhck, lo! in their hands men bore</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A store of brave gold flagons, wherein, unto the street,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wine brought they for the strangers; to give them welcome meet.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>There was a lord of manor here dwelling, hight Astold;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Into the Austrian country the way to them he told:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>By Mautern, somewhat further the Danube stream adown.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>There right true service later the mighty queen did own.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto his niece the bishop a loving farewell bade;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>To be of cheerful spirit her earnestly he pray'd,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And win herself such honour as Helka erst had done.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Ay! what great honour later amongst the Huns she won I</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Unto the Traisen river the guests they soon did bring;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And Riideger's retainers served them, unwearying,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Until the Hun-folk riding across the country came.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Then was there mickle honour done to the royal dame.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The king of the Huns' country did, near the Traisen, own</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>A very noble stronghold, to everyone well known.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Its name was Traisenmauer, where Helka lived of yore,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And practised such great virtues, scarce met with any more,</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Save only in Kriemhilda;— for she knew how to give;—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And, after all her sorrow, was for some joy to live.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>In that she also honour of Etzel's folk might have;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Which soon, in fullest measure, the heroes to her gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>The sovereignty of Etzel was own'd so far and wide</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>That at his court were met with, at every time and tide,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The bravest of all warriors whose names were known to fame</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>'Mongst Christians or heathens: all thither to him came.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>With him there was at all times—which scarce again can come—</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The Christian confession along with heathendom.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Whatever rule of living each for himself might have,</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The king's mood was so easy, plenty to all he gave.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
