<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-18" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XVIII.— HOW SIEGMUND WENT BACK TO HIS OWN LAND</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Kriemhilda's husband's father had to her presence come.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And to the queen thus spake he: " We now would fain go home &gt;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow that we in Rhineland, unwelcome guests must be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Kriemhilda, dearest lady, come to my land with me.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Since that your noble husband, by treason underhand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hath from us all been taken here in this very land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You must not overlook it: I will be kind to you</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For love of my son Siegfried; doubt not that this is true.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Henceforward also, Lady, to you the power I'll yield</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That the bold warrior Siegfried did teach you how to wield.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The land and the crown likewise shall subject be to you;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all of Siegfried's vassals will gladly service do."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then were the servants bidden that thence they were to ride;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It was a mighty business the horses to provide!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Amidst their bitter foemen to dwell were sorry cheer.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They bade the dames and maidens to seek their travelling gear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And when King Siegmund also was ready forth to ride,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The kinsmen of Kriemhilda besought her to abide:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her place was with her mother, and there to stay ought she.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the noble lady: " Nay, that can hardly be!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" How could I bear for ever him with these eyes to see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Through whom to me, poor woman, hath come such misery? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Giselher, the youthful, made answer: " Sister dear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For duty's sake now shouldst thou bide with thy mother here.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Of them who have distress'd thee, and brought thee to despair,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou dost require no service; my fortune thou shalt share."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But to the knight she answer'd: " Nay, this can never be;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I needs must die of sorrow if I should Hagen see."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" I'll see that doth not happen, my sister dear," quoth he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" With Giselher thy brother in safety shouldst thou be;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Amends will I make to thee, for thy dear husband's death."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the poor forlorn one: "True need Kriemhilda hath!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When this so kindly offer to her the young man made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ut and also Gemot fell Hkewise to persuade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all her faithful kinsfolk: they begged her not to go:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For amongst Siegfried's kindred not many did she know.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"They are all strangers to thee," Gemot began to say;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" So strong is no man living but he must die one day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bethink thee then, dear sister, and comfort thy sad mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Stay with thy friends and kinsmen: it will be for thy good."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So Giselher she proirn.ed that there she would abide.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hor£c:i all were ready for Siegmund's men to ride,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who would be homeward riding unto the Niblung-land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The pack-horses all laden with knightly gear did stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Lord Siegmund came, and standing before Kriemhilda, then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Said he unto the lady: "The whole of Siegfried's men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Await you by the horses; 'tis time we rode awa</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For willingly I would not with the Burgundians lay."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But lady Kriemhild' answer'd: " My friends their counsel give—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So many as are faithful—that I with them sho ' ' v:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For I have ne'er a kinsman within the Niblung</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sad was the heart of Siegmund when he did ur ieistand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then answer'd her King Siegmund: " Let that &gt;..uu uy r,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rather than to my kinsmen I'll give to you my :rown.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With power and might you'll wear it, as you have done before;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You shall be none the worse that our hero is no more.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Come back with us, if only it were for your child's sake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You surely will not, lady, the babe an orphan make.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When once your son a man is he'll comfort your sad mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile you'll have the service of many heroes good."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake: " Sir Siegmund, truly I cannot with you ride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate'er may happen to me here must I still abide</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Among my friends and kinsfolk, and mourn with me they will."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The good knights at this answer began to take it ill.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With one accord they answer'd: " Then mv.n we fain confess</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That for the first time, truly, our hearts knew bitterness.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since you indeed are wiUing here with our foes to bide .</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On such a grievous journey did heroes never ride."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Said she: " Ye may, God-speeding, without foreboding fare:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Safe-conduct shall be given—of that I'll have a care—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From here to Siegmund's country. As for my darling child,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto ye knights i trust him, and to your mercies mild!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they were well persuaded that thence she would not go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lieges all of Siegmund did weep for very woe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How full of bitter sorrow was Siegmund when his leave</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He took of dame Kriemhilda! Then knew he how to grieve.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Woe be on these great doings," the noble king quoth he:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" An ending worse of pleasure there ne'er again can be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>10 king yji to u. kinsfolk, than this to us has been.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No more shall we henceforward in Burgundy be seen."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then loud, that all might hear them, the men of Siegfried spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Yet once again the journey may we to this land make,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When we shall have discover'd who laid our master low.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They'll have among his kinsfolk stout enemies enow! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And so he kiss'd Kriemhilda; and mournfully did say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whenas he saw for certain she had a mind to stay:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Now will we unrejoicing go home unto our land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My sorrow for the first time now do I understand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From Worms without an escort unto the Rhine they rode;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Well might they, notwithstanding, be confident of mood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That if they should of foemen an onset have to ward.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hands of stalwart Niblungs would serve them for a guard.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Leave did they take of no man ere they set forth to ride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Giselher and Gemot were presently espied</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All kindly coming t'wards him: his sorrow made them grieve,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As soon these gallant heroes did bring him to believe.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For then the princely Gemot right courteously said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Be God in Heaven my witness! that Siegfried now is dead</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Is through no fault on my part, nor have I heard men tell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who wish'd him any evil: so can I mourn him well."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then had they a safe-conduct at Giselher's own hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And carefully he led them in time, from out the land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king and all his warriors to Netherland got home.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How little could their kindred rejoice to see them come!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And what befell them after I cannot rightly say.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And still one heard Kriemhilda bewailing day by day</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That none could give her comfort, in either heart or mood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Giselher, who only was true to her and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The beauteous Brunhilda still arrogantly sat:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howe'er Kriemhilda fretted she took no thought for that,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And never more in goodwill did turn to her again.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erelong the dame Kriemhilda did wring her heart with pain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
