<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-28" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup><h2><span epub:type="label">Adventure</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</span></h2><h3 epub:type="title">HOW THE BURGUNDIANS CAME TO ETZEL'S STRONGHOLD</h3></hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as the Burgundians were come to Hunnish land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Bern a chieftain heard it,—the aged Hildebrand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his lord he told it; to him 'twas all unmeet;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet bade he them with kindness the valiant knights to greet.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The ready Wolf hart bade them to bring the horses out.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then rode along with Dietrich full many a warrior stout,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As towards the open country to welcome them he went.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There had they pitch'd already full many a noble tent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When Hagen, lord of Tronje, them from afar espied,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his masters turning, in courteous words he cried:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Now, please ye, gallant warriors, dismount on to your feet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And them whom you would welcome go forth yourselves to meet.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The company that cometh is right well known to me:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They are the doughty warriors from Amelung country.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he of Bern doth lead them; they are of courage high.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twere better not to flout them when folk to serve ye try."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then down from horse alighted (as was indeed but right)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All they who came with Dietrich, full many a squire and knight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They walk'd towards the strangers, where they the chiefs could see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And courteously greeted the men of Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When noble Dietrich saw them their way towards him make,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Perchance ye fain would hearken to what the warrior spake</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the sons of \Jt6. Their journey grieved him sore:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The truth, he thought, Sir Riideger had known and told before.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Be welcome, sirs, right welcome, Gunther and Giselher,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Gernot, too, and Hagen; and, not the less, Volker</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And swift and ready Dankwart! Have ye not understood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That o'er her Niblung hero Kriemhilda yet doth brood? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Then let her brood for ever! " Hagen in answer said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"For many a long year is it since he was stricken dead.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To love the King of Hunsland is now her duty plain:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried hath long been buried; he comes not back again."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now let us, an' it please you, leave Siegfried's wounds alone;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whilst Dame Kriemhilda liveth evil may still be done."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So did the noble Dietrich, the knight of Bern, declare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Thou Mainstay of the Niblungs, to guard thyself beware! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And wherefore should I guard me? " the high-born king replied;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Tidings we had from Etzel (what should I ask beside?)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, came we hither riding, 'twould give him much content</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My sister Kriemhild, likewise, hath many a message sent."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If I may give you counsel," so Hagen to them spake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Beg that the noble Dietrich and his good warriors make</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Some better declaration of what they have in mind.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And tell us to what humour Dame Kriemhild is inclined."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the three mighty chieftains to speak apart withdrew,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gunther to wit, and Gernot, and the lord Dietrich, too:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Now, knight of Bern, pray tell us, thou noble warrior good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What of the queen thou knowest, and what may be her mood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The knight of Bern made answer: " What can I tell you more?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I hear her ev'ry morning weeping and wailing sore,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This wedded wife of Etzel—in manner piteous.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the great God of Heaven, for stalwart Siegfried's loss."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"It may not be averted,"—that boldest man declared,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Volker, the fiddle-player,—" the doom whereof we've heard;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To court we're bound to journey, there for ourselves to see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What fate for us good warriors among the Huns shall be."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So hence the bold Burgundians to court rode on their way</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>After their country's fashion, in glorious array.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a bold man marvell'd among the Hunfolk there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At Hagen, lord of Tronj6, what kind of man he were.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For since was told the story, (that was enough alone,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How he the Netherlander Siegfried to death had done,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The stoutest of all warriors, the husband of Kriemhild—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With questions about Hagen the court was wellnigh fill'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of goodly growth and presence the hero was, no doubt;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Broad-shouldered and deep-chested; his hair was fleck'd about</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With streaks of grisly colour; long in the shank was he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And stony was his visage; he walk'd right royally.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then quarters were appointed for the Burgundian men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The whole of Gunther's followers were sunder'd from him then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This by the queen was compass'd, with hatred for him fill'd;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hence all the yeomen, later, were in their hostel kill'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Since Dankwart, Hagen's brother, the marshal had been made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king with zeal commended the men to him; and bade</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he would seek their comfort and let them have their fill.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This chief of the Burgundians bore all of them goodwill.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And now came Queen Kriemhilda with all her company</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she might greet the Niblungs with feigned courtesy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Giselher, her brother, she kiss'd and took his hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This Hagen saw, and tighter he laced his helmet's band.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"In view of such a greeting," thus Hagen blurted out,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"A prompt and ready warrior may well have some misdoubt!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To kings and to their vassals greetings unlike befall:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We've made no lucky journey to this high festival."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"To those who fain would see thee," said she, " now welcome be:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou shalt not have a greeting for friendship's sake from me.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Say what it is thou bringest from Worms beyond the Rhine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That thou so great a welcome shouldst have from me and mine."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If I had heard the tidings," so Hagen spake again,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That you for gifts were looking at hands of every thane.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had I myself been wealthy I would have twice bethought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or ever to this country my gifts for you I brought."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"'Tis rather you, who tidings to me should give: to wit,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The Nibelungen treasure, what have ye done with it?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It was mine own possession, and that right well you knew:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas this ye should have brought me to Etzel's land with you."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I' faith, my Lady Kriemhild, 'tis now full many a day</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since when at my disposal the Niblung treasure lay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At bidding of my masters 'twas sunk in the Rhine-tide:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There till the Day of Judgment, in sooth, it may abide."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the queen in answer: " 'Tis even as I thought!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right little of it have you for me to this land brought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Although 'twas mine, and whilom within my power it lay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since when I've spent thereover full many a dreary day."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The devil a bit I bring you! " Sir Hagen fell to swear:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I have my shield to carry, and that 's enough to bear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Together with my mail-coat; my helm 's a trifling thing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My sword I have in hand though, so naught for you I bring."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon the queen spake loudly unto those warriors all:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Let no man any weapon carry into the hall;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Give them to me, ye heroes, I'll keep them safe for you! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Nay, by my troth," cried Hagen, "that will we never do!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I covet not the honour, gentle princess and fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That thou unto the hostel my shield thyself shouldst bear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor other of my weapons: thou hast a queen become;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So taught me not my father; I will be chambergroom."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"O woe on all my sorrow! " Kriemhilda loudly said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"How is it that my brother and Hagen are afraid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To leave their shields in keeping? They have been warn'd, I see;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And knew I who had done it, I'd give him death for fee."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon Lord Dietrich answer'd, and said to her in scorn:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"'Twas I that took upon me these noble kings to warn;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Hagen warn'd I likewise, the brave Burgundian.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Come on, thou devil's daughter, do me the worst you can! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ashamed and sore confounded at this was Etzel's wife:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For bitterly with Dietrich she feared to be at strife.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She found no word to answer, but went away in haste,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whilst but a few sharp glances upon her foes she cast.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then hand by hand two warriors took each of other hold:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The one was noble Dietrich, the other Hagen bold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake in courtly manner that knight of spirit high:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Your coming to the Hunfolk doth grieve me, verily,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Seeing the queen hath spoken such words to you but now."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen spake, of Tronje: " 'Twill matter not, I trow."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In such wise with each other, parley'd the two brave men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile King Etzel saw them, and fell to questioning then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I would that some one told me," the mighty sovereign said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Who is that warrior yonder, to whom Sir Dietrich bade</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So heartily a welcome? Of courage high is he;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whoever were his father, a hero must he be! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then one of Kriemhild's liegemen to answer him began:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"He is by birth of Tronje, his sire was Aldrian.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How blithe so e'er he bears him, he hath a spirit grim.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You shall yourself discover I tell no lies of him."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"How shall I have occasion to know he is so stern? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(The many sly devices as yet he had to learn,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherewith, to catch her kinsmen, the queen sought to contrive</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That none of them from Hunsland again might come alive.)</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Well knew I that same Aldrian, a liegeman of mine own,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And here with me he won him much honour and renown.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas I a knight who dubb'd him, and gave him of my gold;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My faithful Helka bore him much kindness, too, of old.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And all, by that same token, of Hagen know I well.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Into my hands for hostage two goodly children fell,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He and the Spanish Walther; who being to manhood bred,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I sent back Hagen; Walther with Hildegunda fled."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He thought of the old stories and all that happ'd of yore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His olden friend of Tronj he gladly saw once more.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who in his youth good service to him ne'er fail'd to lend.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon he in age repaid him by death of many a friend.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
