<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure V.— HOW SIEGFRIED FIRST SAW KRIEMHILDA</h2>
			<p>
				<span><span>One saw them daily riding to Worms upon the Rhine,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The guests who to the revels did joyously incline.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Those whom the love of Gunther unto his kingdom brought,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Were freely offered horses, and raiment richly wrought.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Seats, ready for all comers, were well and duly made,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Fit for the best and highest,—as hath to us been said,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For two and thirty princes at that festivity;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For which fair dames bedecked them in merry rivalry.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then busiest of the busy was Giselher the lad.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For kinsmen and for strangers a welcome kind he had.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Receiving them with Gemot; and every knight and squire</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Was greeted by these warriors, as honour did require.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Full many a gilded saddle to Worms these riders brought,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With richly chased bucklers, and garments finely wrought;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They brought them to the Rhineland to grace the festival;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And many of the wounded were merry enough withal.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>For those who on their pallets lay wounded, in distress.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Must needs, though death were grievous, forget its bitterness,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And all the sick and ailing, must drive dull care away,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And join in the rejoicings for this great holiday.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Was ever such gay living and hospitality!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Delights, beyond all measure, and boundless jollity</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Were shared by all the people, and found on every hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And there was joy and gladness throughout King Gunther's land.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>'Twas on a Whitsun morning; one saw them all go by,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>All festively apparelled, and mounted gallantly:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Five thousand men, and upwards, to join the revels ride.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And many a pleasant contest began on ev'ry side.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The host was not unmindful, and well did understand</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How heartily and truly the prince of Netherland</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Love-bound was to his sister, whom yet he had not seen;—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A match for whom in beauty no maiden yet had been.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then to the king did Ortwein the thane, his thought unfold:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" If you, with fullest honour, this festival would hold,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>You should allow our brave guests our winsome maids to see</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Who are, in truth, the glory and pride of Burgundy.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" For where would man's delight be, and what could charm his life,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If there were no fair maidens, and ne'er a comely wife?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now, therefore, let your sister before your guests appear."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>This was a pleasing counsel to many a hero's ear!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Most gladly will I do this," replied the king, straightway,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And all who heard his answer had merry hearts that day.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He sent to summon Ute, and eke her daughter fair.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And bade them with their maidens at once to court repair.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then in their presses sought they for all their garments gay,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And all the goodly raiment that had been stored away;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The gold lace and the bracelets that there to hand were laid;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And with all care bedecked her full many a lovely maid.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And many a knight on that day had younger gladly been,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That he might be of women more favourably seen;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Instead whereof he'd care not a kingdom rich to own!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And gladly did they gaze on these damsels yet unknown!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then the rich king commanded that with Kriemhild should go</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A hundred of his liegemen,—her service pledged unto.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of his and her own kinsmen, who carried sword in hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Such were the court-attendants of the Burgundian land.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The rich Queen-mother Ute with her fair daughter came,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And in her train brought with her full many a comely dame,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Five score of them or over,—all royally arrayed.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Her daughter, too, was followed by many a winsome maid.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>From out the women's quarters one might have seen them go;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>There was a goodly thronging of heroes eke, I trow.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For this of all things eager, if it perchance might be</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That they should have the fortune the noble maid to see,</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then came the lovely maiden: even as morning-red</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>From sombre clouds outbreaking. And many a sorrow fled</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>From him whose heart did hold her, and eke so long had held:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>When thus the winsome fair one before him he beheld.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Upon her raiment glittered full many a precious stone:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Her rosy blushing colour with lovely radiance shone.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Though any would deny it he could not but confess,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That on this earth he never had seen more loveliness.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Just as the moon in brightness excels the brightest stars,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And, suddenly outshining, athwart the clouds appears;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So seemed she now, compared with dames of fairest guise.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then did our gallant hero feel his bold spirits rise.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>One saw before her marching the chamberlains, in state,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But the high-mettled warriors their order would not wait:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They thronged to where, in passing, the fair maid they could see.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The while Sir Siegfried suffered both joy and misery.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Sadly he thought within him: " How can it ever be?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>It is mere foolish dreaming that I should marry thee!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet to be still a stranger!—then were I better dead! "</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And, thinking so, his colour did change 'twixt white and red.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>There stood the son of Siegmund; as winsome did he look</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As if his form were limned upon a parchment-book.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By hand of cunning master; and all men said of him,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That there was no man like him, so fine and fair of limb.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>They who the maid attended now strove to clear the track.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And keep the throng from pressing; and many a knight drew back.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And manly hearts beat quicker for joy, in many a breast,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As passed each high-born lady in splendid raiment drest.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then outspake gallant Gemot, the prince of Burgundy:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" To him, who such good service so late hath done to thee,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thou Gunther, dearest brother, shouldst haste to do the same</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In sight of all thy warriors: I say it without shame.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" If thou would'st bid Sir Siegfried unto my sister go.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That the fair maid may greet him, much good might come, I trow.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>She, who ne'er greeted warrior, may by her greeting cheer;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And thus this goodly hero be bounden to us here."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then some of the host's kinsmen went where the knight did stand</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And thus spake to the warrior who came from Netherland:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" The king his leave hath granted that you to court should go,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His sister there shall greet you: they would you honour show."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>At this the knight's mood changed again from grave to gay;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And in his heart Love reigned, and grief had fled away,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For the fair Ute's daughter at last his eyes would see!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right soon she greeted Siegfried, with winning modesty.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When the high-couraged warrior she saw before her there.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Her cheeks were lit with crimson: then spake the maiden fair:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Be welcome here, Sir Siegfried, thou good and noble knight."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And when he heard her greeting his heart grew wondrous light.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>He bent him low before her; she took him by the hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How lover-like the knight did by the fair maiden stand!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Each looked upon the other with many a tender glance.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>This hero and his lady,—and yet they looked askance.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Was that white hand, I wonder, in lover's fashion press'd?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In sign of tender wooing? in sooth 'twas ne'er confess'd.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But scarce can I believe that such chance had been let go;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For she her kindness to him did very quickly show.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>In the full bliss of summer, and in the fair Maytide,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Within his heart could never, again such joy abide</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As now did fill his bosom; the while he there did stand,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And her whom he desired was holding hand in hand.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And many a warrior murmured: "Ah, if it only were</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>My lot to walk beside her, as I have seen him here,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Or at her side to lay me, what bliss would mine have been! "</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Never served hero better, methinks, to win a queen.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Whate'er might be the country the strangers call'd their own.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>None had an eye for any save for this pair alone.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And when they let her kiss him,—the goodly man and brave!—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In all this world he never a greater joy could have.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then rose the King of Denmark, and suddenly did cry:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" To bring about this greeting how many wounded lie!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Too well have I observed it,—and all by Siegfried's hand;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Forefend him, God, from coming again to Danish land! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>On one side and the other they bade the folk make way</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For beauteous lady Kriemhild. Then saw one an array</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of valiant knights who churchward did bear her company.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then could her goodly gallant no longer near her be;</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>For she went to the minster, with all her dames beside.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So fair a sight and queenly was she in all her pride,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That the high vows of many whilom forgot to rise;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And many a hero feasted his soul upon her eyes.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Hardly did Siegfried's patience last till the mass was done.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet might he thank his fortune that he such grace had won,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That she to him inclined, whom in his heart he bore:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Therefore it was but fitting that he should love her more.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>As she came from the minster, which he had left before.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The gallant thane was bidden to join the dame once more.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then, first, began to thank him the winsome maid, that he</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Beyond all other warriors had fought so gloriously.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now God reward you, Siegfried," thus spake the child so fair,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Right well have you deserved that all the warriors here</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Do love and serve you truly, as they themselves avow."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right tenderly began he to look on Kriemhild now.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" For ever will I serve you! " declared the warrior,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Henceforth my head I'll never lay down to rest before</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Your least wish be accomplished, if life be granted me;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>All this, my lady Kriemhild, for your dear sake shall be."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then, for the space of twelve days, on each new dawning day,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>One saw the lovely maiden beside the knight alway.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As often as to court she before her friends must go.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Unto the knight this service did her great love allow.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>All kinds of mirth and pleasure, and mighty noise withal,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Were seen and heard forthcoming daily from Gunther's hall,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Without, and inside also,—from many a gallant man.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Sir Ortwein and Sir Hagen right wondrous feats began.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Whatever games were started these jocund heroes were</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Always among the foremost, a skilled and ready pair.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whereby these warriors soon were well known to every guest;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of such kind were the jewels that Gunther's land possessed.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Those who had long lain wounded one saw, at last, appear:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They too would share the pastimes, would fence and throw the spear</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Among the king's retainers; well-pleased to find at length</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That they could do as others; they had renewed their strength.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The host would have them treated well, at his festal board.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Theirs was to be the best food. Thus managed he to ward</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The slightest breath of scandal, which oft a king doth reach.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>From guest to guest on went he, with kindly words for each.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>He said: "All ye, good warriors, before ye ride away,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I pray ye take my presents: 'twas in my mind alway</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To recompense your service; my goods despise not ye:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I fain would share them with you; this do I willingly."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then did the lords of Denmark thus answer, out of hand:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Before we ride hence, homewards unto our fatherland,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>We fain would have a treaty: of peace we knights have need.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>We've lost dear friends in plenty who, through your knights, lie dead."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>King Ludegast of Denmark was healed now of his wound,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And eke the Saxon leader was once more whole and sound.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Albeit many dead men they left in alien land.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then went the royal Gunther to where Siegfried did stand.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And to the warrior spake he: " Advise what I shall do;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For early on the morrow our foes intend to go,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And crave abiding pledges of peace, from mine and me:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now counsel me, thane Siegfried, what seemeth good to thee?</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" What ransom they have offered thou shalt be truly told:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So much as mares five hundred can carry of pure gold.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>This will they give me gladly, if I will set them free."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then Siegfried answered stoutly • " That would unworthy be!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Free, and without a ransom hence shouldst thou let them fare:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And that these noble warriors henceforward may beware</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How they come hither, riding as foemen to our land.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of this in full assurance let both kings give their hand."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" This counsel will I follow! " So saying, forth they went.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A message to the foemen was soon thereafter sent:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" The gold, that ye have offered, doth no man care to keep,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>While for the strife-worn warriors at home their dear ones weep."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then many a shield with treasure piled high they carried there:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Enough, although he weighed not, for every friend to share;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Five hundred marks well-counted, yea more, he gave to some.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>This counsel to King Gunther had from bold Gemot come.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then took they leave, for all were impatient to be gone;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But first, before Kriemhilda the guests filed, one by one;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>There sat dame Ute also, the Queen, who bade " God speed " I</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Never before were warriors sped half so well, indeed.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The hostels were left empty when they had ridden away.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Only at home remained the king, in state array</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With all his friends and kinsmen,—full many a noble knight.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>These, day by day, were gladden 'd, by dame Kriemhilda's sight.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Now Siegfried, the good hero, did also sue for leave:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Not hoping more to win her, to whom his heart did cleave.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The king o'erheard the saying that he would fain away:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>'Twas Giselher who urged him his journey to delay.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now whither, noble Siegfried, is it thy will to ride?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Stay rather, I beseech thee, and with our warriors bide.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Remain with our King Gunther, and with his men and me;—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Are there not here fair women, whom thou hast leave to see? "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then spake the stalwart Siegfried: "So bide the steeds in stall!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For I have changed my purpose, I will not ride at all.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And bear the bucklers hence too;— I hoped to see my land,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But Giselher's true friendship I know not to withstand."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Thus did the gallant hero remain for friendship's sake.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And in no other country could he a sojourn make</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That to his soul were sweeter;— and so it hap'd that he</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>On every day thenceforward did fair Kriemhilda see.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>For her surpassing beauty he was content to stay</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And spend the days in pastimes, which whiled the hours away.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Although her love constrained him, it gave him grievous pain.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Through it the brave knight, later, was miserably slain.</span></span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
