<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup><h2><span epub:type="label">Adventure</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span></h2><h3 epub:type="title">HOW THEY JOURNEYED TO THE FESTIVAL</h3></hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now in their stir and bustle awhile we'll let them be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And tell how Dame Kriemhilda and her fair company</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hence, on their journey Rhinewards, from Niblung-land did go.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No horses of fine raiment e'er bore so grand a show.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When many sumpter-coffers were ready for the way,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then with his friends Sir Siegfried no longer did delay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To ride forth, with Kriemhilda, wherein they look'd for joy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For all of them soon after it turn'd to sore annoy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They left at home behind them Sir Siegfried's baby son.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The firstborn of Kriemhilda,—not elsewise could be done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From out of their state- journey arose much woe and pain:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His father and his mother that babe saw ne'er again.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thence also did Lord Siegmund together with them ride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had he but known what evil thereafter would betide</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At this same courtly banquet, he ne'er had gone at all:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him by loss of kindred worse ill could ne'er befall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Heralds were sent before them the news betimes to say.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And soon rode out to meet them, in lordliest array,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Many of Ute's kinsfolk and Gunther's gallant men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host began to stir him his guests to welcome then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He went unto Brunhilda where seated was the dame:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"How did my sister greet you," quoth he, " when first you came?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Even in the self-same fashion you Siegfried's wife must greet."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Said she: " That will I gladly; I love her, as is meet."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the great king: " Early to-morrow are they due.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If you would fain receive them, be quick in what you do;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest we have first to greet them in this our citadel.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In all my days I have not had guests I loved so well."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Her maidens and her women she therefore straightway bade</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To go and seek fine raiment, the best that could be had,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such as her own attendants might wear her guests before.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This did they with much pleasure, of that you may be sure!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther's men now hasten'd to tender service due.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host about his person had all his warriors true.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The queen herself rode with him, all gloriously array'd;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To these well-lov€d guests was a royal welcome made.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With what unfeign'd rejoicing the guests by all were met!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas said that Dame Brunhilda did ne'er such greeting get</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In the Burgundian kingdom on the part of Dame Kreimhild.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They who had ne'er beheld her with happiness were fiU'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By this time was arrived Sir Siegfried with his men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw the heroes riding forwards and back again</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In all parts of the meadows, a vast and shapeless host;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>None there could get away from the thronging and the dust.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now when the country's ruler did gallant Siegfried see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Together with King Siegmund, how courteously spake he:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Ye are to me right welcome, and unto every friend!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow your royal visit in joy to us will end."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"God prosper you! " quoth Siegmund, that honour-loving man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Since my son Siegfried's friendship for you and yours began.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas aye my hope and purpose one day your face to see."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther said: " I also am glad that it should be."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then was Siegfried received, as well did him beseem,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With ev'ry fitting honour: which none amiss did deem.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Giselher and Gernot did lend all courteous aid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Methinks to no guests ever were kindlier honours paid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And now the two kings' spouses anigh each other came.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Empty was many a saddle, as many a beauteous dame</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was by the hands of heroes dismounted on the grass:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For those who loved fair women no Httle work there was!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then lovingly the ladies unto each other went;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a knight who saw it was heartily content</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That of these twain the greeting so handsomely befell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then many a warrior saw one stand by each damosel.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The throng of noble people each other's hands did take;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whilst men unto each other their courtly bows did make,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The ladies fair were kissing each other lovingly,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which Siegfried's men and Gunther's right joyous were to see.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>No longer did they linger, but rode towards the town.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host meanwhile had bidden that every guest be shown</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How truly he was welcome to royal Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then many a match was tilted for maidens fair to see.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And Hagen, too, from Tronje, and Ortewein also,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they were men of power did all they could to show;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And whatsoe'er they order'd that durst no man gainsay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the guests so welcome much service offer'd they.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The clang of shields resounded before the castle-gate</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From many a thrust and parry; and long thereby did wait</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host and guests together, ere within doors they came;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay, ajp-d the hours sped quickly with many a merry game.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before the stately palace all joyously they rode;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many fine-wrought housings, of handsome stuff and mode</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were seen upon the saddles of many a well-dight dame.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On either side low-hanging. Then Gunther's chieftains came.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The guests unto their chambers were taken presently.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw how Lady Brunhild at times would cast her eye</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Toward the Lady Kriemhild, who verily was fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her colour in bright beauty might well with gold compare.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>At Worms was heard the turmoil, on all sides of the town,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of these incoming strangers. King Gunther made it known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his marshal, Dankwart, that he for these must care;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So did he for the people good lodging-room prepare.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Both out of doors and indoors they e'en might feast their fill.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay! ne'er before were strangers welcomed with more goodwill.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever they desired was ready at their side:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So wealthy was King Gunther to none was aught denied.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Served were they in all friendship and banish'd was all hate;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host himself at table with all the guest-folk sate.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried must now his seat take where he afore had done;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There went to table with him full many a worthy one.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Twelve hundred gallant warriors were round the table seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sitting with him and feasting. Then thought Brunhild the queen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ne'er a sovran ruler could ever have more wealth.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Still leaned she so towards him she could but wish him health.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And verily that evening, while the king sat there yet.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right many a costly garment was by the wine made wet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As the cup-bearers quickly around the table went.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The servants there were many, and all right diligent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As long had been the custom when festival was made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the maids and matrons a fair good-night they bade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To whomsoever came there the host a welcome gave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In kindliness and honour they all enough could have.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as night was ended and the next daylight shone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The packing-chests were open'd, and many a precious stone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shone bright on goodly raiment, by lady's hand shown forth.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was to sight unfolded full many a robe of worth.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ere yet it was broad daylight the knights and squires came out</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the hall in numbers; again began the rout</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or ever early mass had before the king been sung.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then thanks for featly riding he gave the heroes young.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon shrill and loud resounded full many a trumpet-blast.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From drums and pipes together there was a noise so vast,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Worms, the great, wide city, loud echoed to the call.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon their chargers mounted the haughty heroes all.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Throughout the land began then a mighty tournament,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where many a good knight tilted; and thereto many went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whose youthful hearts and eager beat high in gallant mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Behind their shields one saw them, gay warriors and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And at their windows seated look'd down the stately dames</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And beauteous, well-dight maidens, intent to watch the games,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And see the merry jousting of the bold knights below.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host amongst his lieges himself would riding go.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus were the hours beguiled, and none did deem them long,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the minster-belfry did call to evensong.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then were brought round the palfreys; the dames to ride began;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble queens were follow'd by many a gallant man.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Alighting at the minster, they stood down on the grass.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto her guests Brunhilda so far right friendly was.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Into the wide cathedral, wearing their crowns of state.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They went: ere long love changed to jealousy and hate.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they to mass had listen'd they left the church, and so</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rode oif with many honours. One saw them later go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All gaily to the banquet. Their pleasure knew no stay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all was merrymaking until the eleventh day.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
