<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>ADVENTURE XX.— HOW KING ETZEL SENT TO BURGUNDY AFTER KRIEMHILDA.</h2>

II43- 
Now on a time it happen'd that lady Helka died; 
Then was King Etzel minded to woo another bride; 
His friends all bade him look to the land of Burgundy, 
Towards a high-bom widow ; Kriemhilda named was she. 

1 144. 
Soon after the fair Helka departed had this life, 
Quoth they : " If thou would'st ever possess a noble wife,— 
The highest and most worthy that king did ever have, 
Then take this self-same lady, widow of Siegfried brave." 

II45- 
" How might that be accomplish'd," then said the mighty king, 
" Seeing I am a heathen and ne'er had christening ? 
The lady is a Christian ; she never would agree. 
A miracle must happen, if this should ever be." 

1 146. 
The ready ones made answer : " What if perchance she should ? 
With thy high name to help thee and all thy substance good, 
To win the noble lady one very well might try. 
To woo so fair a person would please you verily." 



196 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1 147. 

Then said the noble sovereign : " Doth any one of you 
The people of the Rhine-land and eke the country know ? " 
Good Riideger made answer, who from Bechlaren came : 
*' I've known her from her childhood, this queen of noble name. 

1 148. 

" King Gunther and King Gemot, the noble knights and brave. 
And Giselher, the third one, — each ever doth behave 
In such wise as high honour and virtue too have taught ; 
Nor elsewise from aforetime have their forefathers wrought." 

1 149. 

But furthermore said Etzel : " Friend, I would learn of thee 
If in my land she 's worthy to wear the crown with me ? 
And if she 's fair of body as has to me been said ? — 
Then those to me most friendly, need never be dismay'd." 

1 1 50. 

" Indeed unto my lady in beauty likeneth she, 

To Helka, the most mighty ; ay ! in this world could be 

For any king whatever never a wife more fair. 

To whom her love she plighteth he may be of good cheer/* 

1151. 
He spake : " Then win her, Riideger, if dear to thee am I. 
And if beside Kriemhilda it e'er be mine to lie, 
I will reward thee for it as fully as may be ; — 
Seeing thou wilt my wishes have compass'd thoroughly. 

1152. 
" So much out of my treasure I'll have bestow'd on thee 
That thou and thy companions may live right merrily ; 
Of horses and of raiment whatever you may need, 
I will have for your journey made ready with all speed.* 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. I97 

II53- 
Sir Riideger made answer : — a mighty margrave he — 
" Did I thy riches covet, that were unpraiseworthy. 
Unto the Rhine thy message to bear I shall be glad 
At charge of mine own fortune, which from thy hands I had." 

1154. 
Then spake the mighty sovereign : "Now when wilt thou fare 

hence 
To seek this lovely lady ? May God give thee defence 
And honour in the journey, and eke this lady mine, 
May she to us, luck helping, a gracious ear incline." 

II55- 
Then Riideger spake further : " Ere yet we leave the land. 
We must prepare both raiment and weapons to our hand, 
That so before the princes due honour we may have. 
I'll lead unto the Rhine-land five hundred warriors brave. 

1156. 
" So, me and mine beholding, the men of Burgundy 
Shall every man among them be fain to testify 
That ne'er from king in those parts on such a journey went 
So many men or better than thou to the Rhine hast sent. 

1157. 
" And be it not displeasing by thee, great ruler, found 
That, noble love obeying, she was in wedlock bound 
To Siegfried, son of Siegmund ; him hast thou here beheld. 
In honour great he must be in truth for ever held." 

1 158. 
Then said King Etzel : " Though she was wife unto that knight, 
Yet was his noble body so precious in my sight. 
That on the queen I cannot e'er look disdainfully ; 
By her exceeding beauty right well she pleaseth me." 



198 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1159- 
Then spake to him the margrave : " The four and twentieth day 
From now, I dare to promise, shall see us on our way. 
I'll send and tell Gotlinda, my dear wife, presently, 
That I myself will envoy unto Kriemhilda be." 

1 160. 
So thence unto Bechlaren sent Riideger straightway. 
Both sorrowful and proud was the margravine that day. 
A wife by him, he told her, must for the king be woo'd ; 
Still tenderly, as living, she thought of Helka good. 

1161. 
For when her husband's letter the margravine did spell 
Some little was she troubled and straight to weeping fell. 
Would she another mistress like her have e'er again ? 
And when she thought of Helka it gave her heartfelt pain. 

1162. 
In seven days' space had Riideger set forth from Hungary. 
A glad man was King Etzel, and gay at heart was he. 
Already in Vienna the travelling gear was made. 
Nor would he that the journey should longer be delayed. 

1163. 
Gotlinda at Bechlaren awaited Riideger ; 
The margravine his daughter was also waiting there, 
And glad she was on seeing her father and his men. 
And many fair young maidens watch'd kindly for them then. 

1 1 64. 
Ere Riideger the noble forth for Bechlaren went 
From out Vienna's city, all his accoutrement 
Was perfectly made ready and on the sumpters laid. 
They travell'd in such fashion that nothing was waylaid. 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. I99 

I165. 

When they to Bechelaren within the town did fare, 
The host his fellow travellers bade kindly welcome there, 
And offer'd board and lodging. Good quarters each one had. 
The noble Gotelinda to see him come was glad. 

1 166. 
Likewise his well-loved daughter, the little margravine, 
At her dear father's coming could ne'er have gladder been. 
The heroes out of Huns' land how glad she was to see I 
And them the noble maiden accosted merrily : 

1167. 

*' Right heartily be welcome my father and his men ! '* 
And readily, to thank her, fair words were spoken then 
Unto the margrave's daughter, by many a worthy knight. 
Sir Riideger's demeanour Gotlinda read aright. 

1168. 
For when alone at night-time by Riideger she lay, 
How lovingly besought him the margravine to say 
Whither the king from Huns' land had bidden him to go. 
Said he : "My wife Got'linda, I'll gladly let thee know. 

1169. 

" I for the king my master must seek another wife, 
Now that the beauteous Helka departed hath this life. 
Therefore to fetch Kriemhilda unto the Rhine ride we ; 
To Huns' land she is coming a mighty queen to be." 

1170. 
"God grant," said Gotelinda, " that that may come to pass 
Since we have heard, in honour, how much she doth surpass. 
She may replace my lady belike, in days to be. 
We'll let her wear in Huns' land the queen's crown willingly." 



200 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

iiyi. 

Then said the margrave to her : *' Beloved wife of mine, 
The men who hence are riding with me unto the Rhine, 
All kindly must thou offer with them thy stores to share : 
When heroes fare right nobly more stout of heart they are." 

1172. 
She answered : " There is no man who cares to take of me, 
To whom whate'er beseemeth I give not willingly, 
Or ever hence depart ye, thou and thy fighting men." 
Then said to her the margrave : "So doth it please me then." 

1173. 

Ay, and what noble garments they from the store-rooms bare ! 
For every noble warrior there was a plenteous share. 
All lined they were with peltry downwards from throat to spur ; 
What best his purpose suited was chosen of Riideger. 

1 1 74. 
Upon the seventh morning from Bechelaren rode 
The host with all his warriors. Weapons and raiment good 
They bore with them in plenty through the Bavarian land ; 
Nor on the road were harass'd by any robber band. 

II75- 

Within a twelve days' journey they to the Rhine did ride ; 
The tidings of their coming small chance there was to hide. 
Some to the king gave warning, and eke his men did tell. 
That stranger-guests were coming. The host to asking fell 

1176. 
If they were known to any ? that was he fain to know. 
One saw their sumpter-horses so heavy-laden go : 
That they were very wealthy was plain enough to see. 
In the great town was found them a hostel presently. 



XX.] NOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 201 

1177. 
Now when the all-unknown ones were given an abode, 
Upon these self-same nobles vast was the heed bestow'd : 
Men wondered whence the warriors to the Rhine had found 

their way. 
The host sent after Hagen, if haply he could say. 

1178. 
Then spake the knight of Tronjd : " I have not seen them yet, 
I doubtless may declare you when sight of them I get, 
From whence they've come a-riding into this land. I trow 
They must indeed be strangers if naught of them I know." 

1179. 
By this time every stranger a place of lodging had. 
Then forward came the envoy, in rich apparel clad, 
With all his noble comrades ; and so to court they rode. 
Fine raiment were they wearing right well-devised in mode. 

1 180. 
Then quoth the ready Hagen : " For all that I can tell — 
Not having seen these nobles for somewhat of a spell — 
Such like is their demeanour as Riideger might have. 
Out of the Hunnish country, — a noble knight and brave." 

1181. 
" How am I to believe it," the king replied straightway, 
" That he of Bechelaren is hither come this day ? " 
But as the royal Gunther from speaking did forbear, 
Bold Hagen saw for certain that it was Riideger. 

1182. 
He and his friends to meet them, did hasten everyone. 
One saw from off their horses five hundred knights stand down. 
These messengers from Hunsland right welcome were they made. 
And never yet were envoys so gallantly array'd. 



202 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

I183. 
Then Hagen spake of Tronje, and in a loud voice cried : 
" Now in God's name be welcome ye thanes who hither ride, 
The Warden of Bechlaren, and each one of his men." 
An honourable greeting the doughty Huns had then. 

1 1 84. 
King Gunther's nearest kinsmen, came forth to where they were, 
The lord of Metz, Sir Ortwein, then said to Riideger : 
" Ne'er yet in all our life-time have we until this day 
Set eyes on guests so gladly : that may I truly say." 

1185. 
Thanks gave they for the greeting unto the warriors all ; 
So with their noble escort, they went unto the hall. 
And there they found King Gunther with a gallant company, 
And from his throne upstood he, such was his courtesy. 

1186. 
With what right courtly breeding did he the envoys meet ! 
Gemot, as well as Gunther, was full of zeal to greet 
The guest and eke his liegemen, as did his rank demand. 
Good Riideger King Gunther himself took by the hand. 

1187. 
Unto the seat he led him, on which himself he sat : 
Then to the strangers served they, — all gladly did they that — 
Of right good mead full beakers, and of the best of wine 
That ever one could meet with in all the land of Rhine. 

1188. 
Now Giselher and Gere had both of them appear'd ; 
And Dankwart, too, and Volker, who all of them had heard 
About the guests arriving ; they were in gladsome mood : 
Before the king they greeted the noble knights and good. 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 203 

1189. 
Then Hagen, knight of Tronje, unto his lord did say : 
" These warriors of ours should be beholden aye 
For kindness that the margrave hath shown to us before : 
Fair Gotelinda's husband must have reward therefore." 

1190. 
Then spake the royal Gunther : " I can no more delay ; 
In health how are they faring, that tell to me, I pray ; — 
Etzel, I mean, and Helka, who over Hunsland reign ? " 
"All will I," said the margrave, "gladly to you make plain." 

1191. 

Straight from the seat uprose he, as eke did all his men, 
And to the king thus spake he : "If thus it may be then, 
And you, O prince, allow it, I will no more delay 
The tidings that I bring you, but willingly will say." 

1192. 
He said : " Whate'er the tidings that unto us you bear, 
I wait not friendly counsel, but bid you to declare. 
Let me and my men hear them, whatever they may be ; 
I bid you, in all honour, discharge your embassy." 

II93- 
Then spake the trusty envoy : " To you upon the Rhine 
His faithful service tenders that mightful lord of mine ; 
To every friend moreover that unto you may be, 
This message I deliver, in faith and honesty : 

1 194. 
" The noble king doth ask for your pity in his need. 
All joyless are his people : my lady she is dead, 
The rich and mighty Helka, of my good lord the wife ; 
And now full many a maiden doth lead an orphan'd life — 



204 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

II95- 
" Children of noble princes, whom she did rear of late — 
And therefore is the country in lamentable state : 
These now, alas, have no one to rear them faithfully. 
I doubt there is no ending to the king's misery." 

1196. 
" Requite him God," said Gunther, " for that to me he sends 
So willingly his service, as eke unto my friends ! 
The greeting thou hast brought me right gladly have I heard : 
My kinsmen and my lieges shall merit his good word." 

1197. 
Then spake, from the Burgundians, Gemot the warrior : 
" The world fair Helka's dying may rue for evermore, 
For all her many virtues, which she to cherish knew." 
The doughty knight, Sir Hagen, agreed that this was true. 

1198. 
But Riideger said further, the high ambassador : 
*' Since you, O king, allow me, I have to tell you more 
Of that which my dear master hath bidden me fulfil ; 
Since from the death of Helka things have with him gone ill. 

1199. 
*' It hath been told my master that, Siegfried being dead, 
Kriemhilda is a widow. If this be so, indeed, 
And you to her will grant it, then she a crown shall wear 
Before King Etzel's warriors : this have I to declare." 

1200. 
The mighty monarch answer'd (in courteous mood was he) : 
" I'll tell her my opinion, if she perchance agree. 
I'll see that you our answer in three days' time shall know, 
How should I, ere I've asked her, say unto Etzel, no ? 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 205 

I20I. 

Meanwhile they had good lodgings made ready for each guest. 
So well provided were they, that Riideger confessed 
That he had friends in plenty amongst King Gunther's men ; 
As he had once served Hagen, so Hagen served him then. 

I202. 

So Riideger abode there till the third day was come. 
The king a council summon'd, (as was his wise custom) 
Inquiring of his kinsmen if they would deem it right 
That Kriemhild should to Etzel her faith in wedlock plight 

I203„ 

They all, save only Hagen, agreed with one accord ; 
But he unto the warrior, to Gunther spake this word : 
** If you are rightly minded, so will you take good heed, 
That, even though she wish it, you will not do this deed.'* 

1204. 
"And wherefore," answer'd Gunther, "should I not do this 

thing ? 
Whate'er of love the future unto the queen may bring, 
I surely shall not grudge her : sister she is to me. 
We ought ourselves to seek it, if for her good it be." 

1205. 
But once again spake Hagen : " With further talk be done ! 
Knew you as much of Etzel as I of him have known, — 
And were she him to marry, as I have heard you say, — 
Then would yon see good reason, at length to rue the day." 

1206. 
" And wherefore ? * answered Gunther, " since I should take good 

care 
"Never to come so nigh him, e'en though my sister were 
His wife, that I need suffer from any hate of his." 
But once again said Hagen : " I'll ne'er agree to this." 



206 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1207. 
Then messengers to Gemot and Giselher they sent, 
To ask of these two princes if they were well content 
To have Kriemhilda marry the rich and noble king. 
Sir Hagen still gainsayed it, but had no following. 

1208. 
Then spake of the Burgundians the warrior Giselher : 
" Now may you show, friend Hagen, that loyal still you are : 
Make good to her the evil that you to her have done : 
If aught may bring her fortune, that should you leave alone. 

1209. 
" You've wrought unto my sister such evil manifold," — 
So Giselher spake further, — the knight of spirit bold : 
" That she hath had good reason to hold you in despite. 
Ne'er yet was any woman bereft of more delight." 

1210. 
" That am I well aware of and willing to allow. 
And should she marry Etzel and live for long enow, 
Shell do us yet much evil, howe'er she it contrive ; 
For many a goodly warrior to serve her there doth live." 

1211. 
Thereon the valiant Gemot to Hagen answered : 
" In that case it behoves us, until they both be dead, 
To study that we ride not into King Etzel's land. 
We must be loyal to her : thus honour doth demand." 

1212. 
Whereto again spake Hagen : "No man can me gainsay ! 
And should the noble Kriemhild v;ear Helka's crown one day, 
She'll do to us a mischief, howe'er it may be done : 
It better would beseem you to leave the thing alone." 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 20/ 

1213. 
Then wrathfully cried Giselher, of Ut^ fair the son : 
" We need not all be traitors, though thou perchance be one ! 
If honour doth befall her, right joyful should we be, 
Whate'er thou sayest, Hagen, I'll serve her faithfully." 

1214. 
When Hagen heard that saying, anger'd was he in mood : 
For Giselher and Gemot, proud warriors both and good, 
And mighty Gunther likewise, did all of them agree 
That if it pleased Kriemhilda they would no hindrance be. 

1215. 
Then spoke the princely Gere : " The lady I'll advise 
That she do let King Etzel find favour in her eyes : 
So many knights obey him, and suit and service owe, — 
He yet may make her happy in spite of all her woe." 

1216. 
Then went the ready warrior where Kriemhild he did see ; 
She graciously received him : how quickly then spake he ! 
" Well may you greet me, lady, and give me herald's bread, 
For good luck comes to save you now out of all your need. 

1217. 
*' For love of you, dear lady, lo ! there hath hither sent 
One of the best and greatest that e'er had government 
O'er realm with highest honour, or ever crown shall wear ; 
And noble knights sue for him : your brother bids declare." 

1218. 
Then spake the sorrow-laden : " Now God prohibit thee 
And all my friends from making a mockery of me ! 
Of me, the poor forlorn one ! what could I be to one 
Who heart-felt love hath ever from a good woman won ? " 



208 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1219. 
She sorely strove against it ; but presently to her 
There came her brother Gemot and the lad Giselher. 
These tenderly besought her to be of cheerful mood : 
If she the king would marry, 'twould be for her true good. 

1220. 
Not one of them was able the lady to persuade, 
That she should e'er be willing another man to wed ; 
Then did the thanes beseech her : " At least we beg of thee — 
If thou naught else wilt grant us — the messengers to see." 

1221. 
" That will I not refuse ye," replied the noble wife, 
*' For gladly would I look on Sir Riideger in life, 
For all his many virtues. If he it had not been. 
Whoever were the envoy, I would have stay'd unseen.** 

1222. 

She spake : " To-morrow morning, I pray ye, bid him go 
To see me in my chamber ; then will I let him know 
What is my will, right surely : to tell him am I fain." 
Then did her grievous sorrow break forth in tears again. 

1223. 
To Riideger the noble naught better could have been 
Than that he should be granted to see the mighty queen : 
He knew that, could this happen, so wise in words was he, 
She, by the warrior's talking, must needs persuaded be. 

1224. 
So, early on the morrow, after the mass was sung, 
Arrived the noble envoys ; then mighty was the throng. 
Of those who to the palace with Riideger should go. 
All gallantly accoutred ; one saw a goodly show. 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 209 

1225. 
The highborn dame Kriemhilda her heart with trouble sore, 
For Riideger was waiting, — the goodly warrior. 
He found her in the raiment she wore for ev'ry day : 
But none the less her women had donn'd their best array. 

1226. 
She rose and went to meet him, and by the door she stood, 
And unto Etzel's liegeman she gave a welcome good. 
With but eleven comrades he came therein to her. 
Worship had he, for never came nobler messenger. 

1227. 
One bade them all be seated, — the leader and his men. 
The while before her standing they saw her margraves twain, 
Counts Eckewart and Gere, — both noble knights and good. 
For sake of her, their mistress, none seem'd of ioyful mood. 

1228. 
They saw beside her sitting full many a lady fair. 
For nothing save her sorrow had Kriemhild any care. 
The raiment on her bosom was wet with tear-drops hot, 
Nor fail'd the noble margrave Kriemhilda's grief to note. 

1229. 
Then spake the lordly envoy : " Daughter of kingly race, 
To me and to my comrades who here with me have place, 
I pray you leave to grant us that we before you stand 
And tell to you the errand that brings us to this land." 

1230. 
" Now be it to you granted," the queen in answer said, 
" To speak as ye are minded ; for I am purposed 
Right willingly to listen : thou art a herald good." 
Yet to the others' hearing unwilling was her mood. 



210 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1231. 
Then he of Bechelaren, Prince Riideger, began : 
" With plenteous love, and faithful, Etzel, a great sovran, 
To this thy land, fair lady, hath sent an embassy 
Of knights to seek thy favour, — a goodly company. 

1232. 
" He offers thee right frankly love free from all alloy : 
And eke such stedfast friendship thou shalt with him enjoy, 
As erewhile did dame Helka, so near his heart who lay. 
Ay, he hath mourn'd her virtues for many a joyless day." 

1233- 
" Sir Riideger the margrave," in answer spake the queen, 
" No one who hath already my bitter sorrow seen, 
To any man would bid me myself in wedlock bind. 
Ay ! I have lost the best one that ever wife did find." 

1234. 
" What else," the bold man answer'd, "for sorrow may atone 
So well as loving friendship, if such may be, from one 
Who for himself is choosing what seems to him the best ? 
Naught, after heartfelt sorrow, can give such happy rest. 

1^235- 
" If to my noble master to give thy love thou'lt deign, 
Of twelve right wealthy kingdoms thou shalt be sovereign. 
My lord will also give you full thirty princes' lands. 
Each one of which was conquer'd by his all-potent hands. 

1236 
" Thereto shalt thou be mistress of many a worthy wight 
Who to my lady Helka did service owe of right ; 
And over many a lady who dwelt beneath her sway, 
Of high and princely lineage." Thus did the bold knight say. 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 211 

1237. 
" My lord will likewise give thee, as he doth bid me say — 
If with the king thou deignest to wear the crown one day — 
The highest power that ever he unto Helka gave : 
Thou over Etzel's vassals authority shalt have." 

1238. 
Then spake the queen : "What pleasure remains for me in life, 
That ever I should covet to be a hero's wife ? 
Such sorrow have I suffer'd all through the death of one, 
That I must aye be joyless, until my life be done." 

1239. 
But once more spake the Hunsman : " Most high and noble 

queen, 
Your life along with Etzel so glorious would be seen, 
Naught would it be but gladness, if this should come to pass : 
And many a handsome warrior the mighty monarch has." 

1240. 
" The damsels of Queen Helka, the maids that follow thee, 
Shall make with one another a single company ; 
A sight at which the warriors shall merry be of mood. 
Be counsell'd therefore, lady ; in sooth 'tis for thy good ! " 

1241. 
With courtesy she answer'd : ** Now let this parley be 
Until to-morrow early ; then come again to me 
And you shall have my answer to what you have at heart" 
Needs must the valiant warrior agree, and so depart. 

1242. 
When they unto their hostel had all returned home, 
Then sent the noble lady for Giselher to come. 
And likewise for her mother : and unto both did vow, 
That nothing else save weeping was fitting for her now. 



212 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1243. 
Said Giselher, her brother : " Sister, 'tis my belief — 
And some to me have said it — that all thy bitter grief 
King Etzel will make vanish : and shouldst thou marry him — 
Whatever others counsel — well done I will it deem. 



1244. 

" He surely may console thee," said Giselher again : 

" From Rhone unto the Rhine-stream, from Elbe unto the main, 

There's not another sovran so powerful as he. 

Right soon may'st thou be happy, if wife he makes of thee." 

1245. 
" My brother well beloved, how canst thou thus advise ? 
To weep and mourn seems ever more fitting in mine eyes. 
How, at the court there, should I before the warriors go ? 
If ever I were comely, no longer am I so." 

1246. 

Then spake the lady Ut^ her daughter dear unto : 
" Whate'er thy brothers counsel, fail not, dear child, to do ; 
Follow thy friends' advising, so will it prosper thee. 
Too long have I beheld thee in thy great misery." 

1247. 
Then God she pray'd right sorely that store of worldly gear. 
Of silver, gold and raiment be granted unto her, 
To give ; as when her husband in life and health she had ; 
Though never as aforetime could life again be glad. 

1248. 
Within her heart she ponder'd : " Shall I my body give — 
Who am a Christian woman — and with a heathen wive? 
Fore all the world and ever disgrace on me 'twould bring, — 
Though all his wealth he gave me, I would not do this thing ! " 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 213 

1249. 
And so she left the matter : but all night long, till day, 
The lady on her pillow with endless brooding lay. 
Her eyes that shone so brightly, from tears were never dried, 
Until at dawn of morning unto the mass she hied. 

1250. 
The kings came thither also close on the hour of mass ; 
They had been taking counsel upon their sister's case : 
To marry they advised her the king of Hungary. 
But neither found the lady disposed more cheerfully. 

1251. 
Forthwith were orders given King Etzel's men to bring, 
Who now would leave have taken and home been travelling,— 
Accepted or rejected, whichever of the twain. 
Then to the court came Riideger. The heroes urged again 

1252. 
That he should rightly fathom the noble Gunther's mood. 
And do it very quickly : to all did this seem good : 
To get back to their country, they needs must journey far. 
And so unto Kriemhilda they usher'd Riideger. 

1253. 
With kindly words of pleading began the warrior ; 
The noble queen beseeching that she would let him hear 
What message for his master, to Etzel's land she sent. 
I ween he found her answer naught save discouragement : 

1254. 
That she forsooth would never again wed anyone. 
Whereon the margrave answer'd : " That surely were ill-don? ! 
Why shouldst thou thy fair body so wastefully disdain ? 
Thou mightst become with honour a good man's wife again." 



214 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1255. 
But naught avail'd their praying, until that Riideger 
All privately did whisper into the great queen's ear, 
That all she ever suffer'd he would make good again. 
Whereat her great misliking somewhat began to wane. 

1256. 
Unto the queen thus spake he : " Let now your weeping be. 
If you among the Hunsfolk had ne'er a friend save me, 
And all my trusty kinsmen, and eke my liegemen true, 
Hath any done you evil right dearly should he rue." 

1257. 
Thenceforth the lady's humour somewhat more gentle grew. 
She said : " An oath now give me : whatever men may do 
That you will be the first one to right mine injury." 
Whereto the margrave answer'd : " That will I readily." 

1258. 

With all his men did Riideger swear by an oath to her 
That he would serve her truly ; and that no warrior 
Should ever aught deny her, throughout King Etzel's land, 
In what concern'd her honour. So pledged her Riideger's hand. 

1259. 
Then, faithful-hearted, thought she : " Since on my will to wait 
I've met with friends so many, I'll let the people prate 
Howe'er they have a mind to, of me, poor wretched wife ! 
What if I yet have vengeance for my dear husband's life ? " 

1260. 
She thought : "Since Etzel holdeth so many knights in fee, 
I also may command them, and do what pleaseth me. 
So wealthy is he also, I shall have much to give : 
Me did that hateful Hagen of all my goods deprive." 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 21 5 

1261. 
To Riideger thus spake she : " If it were known to me 
That he were not an heathen, I would come willingly, 
Whithersoe'er he listeth, and take him for my lord." 
The margrave answer'd : " Lady, heed not a single word. 

1262. 
" He hath so many warriors, who in Christ's faith believe 
That with the king at no time shall you have cause to grieve. 
What if your faith should win him to take the Christian life ? 
Then might you well be happy to be King Etzel's wife." 

1263. 
Then said her brothers also : " Now, sister mine, say * Yes,' 
And so be quit for ever of your unhappiness." 
Thus long did they beseech her, till, full of sorrow, she 
Before the heroes promised King Etzel's wife to be. 

1264. 
She said : " You will I follow, a queen right sad of heart, 
And fare with you to Huns' land ; so may we now depart, 
When I the friends have found me to bring me to his land." 
To that, before the heroes, fair Kriemhild gave her hand. 

1265. 
Then to her said the margrave : " Hast thou a pair of men. 
To them I can add many : it will be easy then 
To bring you with due honour unto Rhine's further side : 
No longer, mid Burgundians, lady, must thou abide. 

1266. 
" I have five hundred liegemen, and kinsmen too, of whom 
Thou mayst command the service, — or here, or there at home 
To do thy bidding, lady ; and I will do the same. 
Whene'er thou claim 'st my promise, — that so I have no shame. 



2l6 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS [ADV. 

1267. 
" Now see that you have ready your horse accoutrement ; 
What Riideger doth counsel you never shall repent ; 
And say this to your maidens whom you will thither bring : 
* Ay, many a chosen hero shall we meet travelling. 



) » 



1268, 

Still much of wrought equipment from Siegfried's time they had, 
That had been used in riding ; wherewith full many a maid 
Might take the road with honour whene'er they thence should fare. 
Ay ! goodly were the saddles they gave the ladies fair. 

1269. 
If such-like costly raiment they ere had worn before, 
Now ready for the journey they had a goodly store ; 
For of the King such marvels had unto them been said. 
Chests that had long been standing close-lock'd were open laid. 

1270. 
Unwearyingly work'd they till unto the fifth day ; 
They sought from out the presses the stores that in them lay. 
Her treasure-chests to open Kriemhild herself did go. 
On Riideger's good liegemen she fain would wealth bestow. 

1271. 
Still had she somewhat over of gold from Niblung-land ; 
(Among the Huns she thought to divide it with her hand), 
A hundred sumpter horses the load could nowise bear. 
This tale about Kriemhilda was brought to Hagen's ear. 

1272. 
Quoth he : " Because Kriemhilda will ne'er to me be kind, 
The gold that once was Siegfried's, she needs must leave behind 
Why should I such a treasure unto my foes let go ? 
Right well I know what Kriemhild with all this gold will do. 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 217 

1273. 
" For if she hence should bring it, I'll wager verily 
'T would be in largesse given to stir up hate for me. 
They have not e'en the horses to carry it away. 
'Tis Hagen's will to keep it, thus unto Kriemhild' say." 

1274. 
Now when she heard this message, smit to the heart was she. 
The word was likewise carried unto the kings all three. 
Fain would they have gainsaid it, but as this did no good, 
Sir Riideger the noble outspake in joyous mood: 

1275- 
"O, mighty Queen, and noble, why grieve ye for this gold? 
When unto you king Etzel such kindliness doth hold, 
That when his eyes behold you, he'll give such riches rare 
That you can never spend it : that, lady, will I swear." 

1276. 
To him the queen made answer : " Most noble Riideger, 
Never had a king's daughter more wealth bequeath'd to her 
Than that of which Sir Hagen hath now despoiled me." 
Then went her brother Gemot unto the treasury. 

1277. 
By right the king's key took he and put it in the door : 
And gold therefrom withdrew they, that was of Kriemhild's store ; 
Of marks full thirty thousand or something more they had : 
He bade the guests to take it : and Gunther was right glad. 

1278, 
Then he from Bechelaren, dame Gotelinda's lord, 
Said : " If my lady Kriemhild yet owned all the hoard 
Such as it was aforetime when brought from Niblung-land, 
Nor I, nor the queen either, would touch it with our hand. 



2l8 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1279. 
" Now back let it be taken, for of it will I naught ; 
Sufficient from my country, ay, of mine own, I brought, 
That we can do without it right well upon the way, 
And all our homeward charges right royally can pay." 

1280. 
Unto that end her maidens had meanwhile pieces told 
Into a dozen coffers, all of the finest gold 
That ever one might meet with : these with them they would 

bear, 
And ornaments for ladies upon the road to wear. 

1281. 
The mastery of grim Hagen seem'd overpowering. 
Some thousand marks still had she left from the almsgiving. 
For her dear husband's welfare the whole did she dispart ; 
And Riideger but deem'd it done with a right true heart. 

1282. 
Then said the weeping lady : " Where are those friends of mine 
Who for my sake are willing in banishment to pine ? 
They who unto the Huns' land will bear me company? 
Let them take of my treasure and horse and raiment buy." 

1283. 
Then Eckewart the margrave, made answer to the queen : 
" So long as in your household a servant I have been 
Right truly have I served you," thus did the warrior say, 
" Nor will I cease to do so until my dying day. 

1284. 
" And of my men five hundred eke will I bring with me, 
Whom I unto your service do pledge right faithfully. 
For nothing shall divide us, till Death our lives do part." 
She bent her head to thank him : too full was her sad heart. 



XX.] HOW KING ETZEL SENT AFTER KRIEMHILDA. 219 

1285. 
Then led they forth the palfreys, for it was time to go. 
Her friends all fell a-weeping, and many tears did flow. 
The noble lady Ute and many a maiden fair 
Show'd that for dame Kriemhilda their hearts were full of care. 

1286. 
A hundred highborn maidens along with her she led, 
Who as their rank befitted were all apparelled. 
Then from their eyes bright-shining did many a tear-drop well. 
And yet with Etzel later much pleasure them befell. 

1287. 
Lord Giselher came also and Gemot none the less, 
With many of their household, as bade their courtliness. 
They would their well-loved sister upon her journey bring. 
They led a thousand warriors, a goodly following. 

1288. 
The ever-ready Gere, and Ortwein also came ; 
Rumold the kitchen-master he too must come with them. 
Night-quarters made they ready hard by the Danube side. 
But Gunther from the city did but a small space ride. 

1289. 
Ere from the Rhine they journey'd they had before them sent 
Their messengers, who swiftly unto the Huns' land went, 
And told the king beforehand how Riideger had done, 
And as a wife for Etzel the noble queen had won. 



220 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
