<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 37</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-37" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXXVII.— HOW THE MARGRAVE RUDEGER WAS SLAIN</h2>
			<p>
				<span><span>The strangers, until morning, right gallantly had done.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By then Gotlinda's husband unto the court had gone.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And, looking round on all sides, he saw such horrors there</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As moved to inward weeping true-hearted Riideger.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>"Woe's me," then said the warrior, "that e'er I saw the day!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To think that none availeth this misery to stay!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Though peace would I make gladly, the king will ne'er agree,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For more and more he dwelleth upon his injury."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Good Riideger inquiring straightway to Dietrich sent,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If they might make between them the noble king relent.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But he of Bern made answer: " Who could avail thereto?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>King Etzel wills that no one should come betwixt the two."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Now by a Hunnish warrior Sir Riideger was seen</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With eyes bedimm'd with weeping, as they for long had been.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Unto the queen then spake he: " Now look how standeth he,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The man who hath with Etzel the most authority,</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" And who hath at his service the people and the land.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How many a castle is there in Riideger's command,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of which, through the king's bounty, so many he may own!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet he throughout this struggle no worthy stroke hath done.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Methinks he little recketh if things go well or ill,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As long as he hath all things according to his will.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>'Tis said that he is braver than other men mote be:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But that, in all this trouble, hath been full hard to see."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The warrior true-hearted, with downcast mood and grim,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Gave heed unto the speaker. The hero look'd on him.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And thought: " This shalt thou pay for! Thou say'st I am afraid?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thou hast at court thy story somewhat too loudly said."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>His fists to clench began he, and at him straight he ran,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And smote to such good purpose upon that Hunnish man</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That lifeless on the instant him at his feet he laid.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But thus King Etzel's troubles were all the greater made.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Away with thee, base scoundrel! " thereon said Riideger;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Of trouble and of sorrow I have enough to bear!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If I refrain from fighting, why tauntest me for that?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In sooth I have good reason to bear the strangers hate,</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" And all that strength avail'd me I had against them wrought,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Were 't not that I the warriors myself have hither brought.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>'Twas I, in sooth, who led them into my master's land:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I cannot raise against them, therefore, my luckless hand."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then answer to the margrave the great King Etzel made:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" O Riideger most noble, how hast thou lent us aid I</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So many dead already we in the land must own.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>No more of them were needed ] much evil hast thou done."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The noble knight made answer: "The fellow made me wroth</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By casting up against me the wealth and honour both</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That by thy hands so freely have been bestow'd on me:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The liar got his guerdon a whit unluckily."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Now came the queen unto them, who eke had plainly seen</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>What, through the hero's anger, the Hun's reward had been.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Beyond all bounds complain'd she; tears from her eyes she shed.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To Riideger thus spake she: " How have we merited</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" That you the king's misfortune and mine make all the more?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>At all times, noble Riideger, you promised heretofore</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That you would in our service risk honour and eke life.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I've heard the knights award you the meed in many a strife.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The goodwill that you pledged me to you I will recall</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>When me you urged on Etzel, O knight excelling all,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To wit, that you would serve me till one of us was dead;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And ne'er had I, poor woman, thereof such desperate need.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>In that thou speak'st not falsely; I pledged thee, noble dame,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That I for thee would venture my life and my fair fame.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To lose my soul, however, that sware I not at all:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>[ brought these high-born princes unto this festival I '</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>O Riideger," she answer'd, " thy steadfast loyalty</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And eke thine oath forget not, that thou mine injury</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Wouldst cease not to avenge me, and all my trouble sore."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then said to her the margrave: " I ne'er have fail'd before."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then likewise mighty Etzel to supplicate began,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And on their knees before him they two besought the man.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then seem'd the noble margrave sorely discomfited.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The ever faithful warrior right sorrowfully said:</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now God have pity on me, that I have lived for this!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Henceforward all mine honour I must for aye dismiss,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>My truth and noble breeding that erst from God I got!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Woe on me, God in Heaven, that death hath saved me not I</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Whichever side I part from to take the other one,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I shall have acted basely and grievous ill have done;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But if from both I sever, on all sides blame I have:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>May He vouchsafe to guide me Who life unto me gave.'</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Yet still they urged him straitly, the king and eke his wife.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thence came it many a warrior ere long must lose his life</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By Riideger's achieving; till eke that hero fell.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now of his direful doing I must the story tell.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>He knew how this must evil and fearful sorrow bring,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And liefer would he therefore denial to the king,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And eke the queen, have given: full sorely fear'd he that</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If e'er a guest he slaughtered, the world would bear him hate.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Unto the king then spake he— that man of spirit bold:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Lord king, take back whatever from thee I have and hold,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Both land and burghs: with neither will I have aught to do,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But on my feet departing, will into exile go."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then spake the royal Etzel: " Who then will succour me?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The land as well as castles all will I give to thee.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If thou upon my foemen avenge me, Riideger.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thou'lt be a mighty sovran, of Etzel nigh the peer."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>But Riideger made answer: " How could I this essay?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>At home within my dwelling I bade them come and stay;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of drink and meat I offer'd to them in kindly wise.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And gave them gifts: how can I now death for them devise?</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" The folk belike are thinking that I am cowardly!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>My services in nothing to them did I deny—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Or to the noble princes, or any of their men—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That we are knit in friendship repenteth me amain.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>' I gave away my daughter to Giselher the thane,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>[n all the world she could not have look'd for better gain</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>[n honour or good breeding, in truth or worldly gear;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>[ ne'er saw prince so youthful in virtuous mind his peer."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>5ut yet again spake Kriemhild: " Right noble Riideger,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>ow let our grievous trouble for both your pity stir,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>7oT me and the king also; and bear ye well in mind</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>?hat never host was fated such baleful guests to find."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>"hen to the noble lady the margrave answer made:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To-day, with life, must ransom by Riideger be paid</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>or what to me of kindness thou and my lord have shown:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>or that cause I must perish,—and it must now be done.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>This very day, well know I, my castles and my land</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>lust, ownerless, fall to you, through what ye now command,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>ly wife and child commend I unto your gracious care,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>nd eke the hapless people that at Bechlaren are."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Now Riideger, God bless thee! " the king in answer said;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>le and the queen together exceeding glad were made:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right well unto thy people our care we both will give,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>hough if good luck be with me I trust thou yet mayst live."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>nd so upon the venture body and soul he cast;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>thereon the wife of Etzel began to weep at last,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>aid he: " What I have promised I must to you fulfil;—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>oe for my friends, whose foeman I am against my will."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then from the king one saw him depart in mournful mood.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And to his warriors turning, who close beside him stood,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He spake: " To don your armour 'tis time, my liegemen all.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>On yonder brave Burgundians, alas! I needs must fall."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>They bade their folk then hasten to where their arms were found,-</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Haply it were a helmet, or else a buckler round,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whatever it was they wanted, their servants brought the same</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ere long the baleful tidings to the proud exiles came.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>So Riideger in armour with men five hundred went,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Besides a dozen warriors who help unto him lent.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>These would the meed of valour win in the stormy fray;—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They had but little warning that death so near them lay.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then Riideger in helmet one saw march on before;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Keen-edged were all the weapons the margrave's liegemen boi</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And broad the shining bucklers upon their arms as well.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>'Twas all seen by the fiddler: sore ruth upon him fell.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Young Giselher beheld, too, the father of his bride</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With fast-bound helmet marching. That this could aught betic</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Save what was good and friendly, how could he then forbode</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The noble prince was therefore exceeding glad of mood.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now suchlike friends be welcome," said Giselher the thanej</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"Which we upon our journey have had the luck to gain.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of my betrothed lady we'll profit here right well:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I'm glad, upon my honour, this plighting e'er befell."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>I know not what doth cheer you," the minstrel answer made:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>' When saw you e'er for friendship so many knights array'd,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>iVith fasten'd helmets marching, and bearing sword in hand?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By us will Riideger pay for his castles and his land."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>en as the fiddle-player of speaking made an end,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>3ne saw the noble Riideger before the palace wend.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>3is goodly shield he lower'd and set before his feet:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>3e could not offer service, his friends he might not greet</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then cried the noble margrave to those within the hall:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Be on your guard, I warn you, ye valiant Niblungs all!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>le should have had my succour, now must ye ransom me;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>)nce were we friends; now will I be from the troth-pledge free."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>"hey shudder'd at these tidings, those sorely troubled men;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>or them but little comfort there was therefrom to gain,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>ince he would fight against them whom they had held so dear!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I rom foes they had already had mickle ills to bear.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Now grant it, God in Heaven," the warrior Gunther said</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That you will let your pity be moved to our aid,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"j k.nd that abounding honour which hope unto us gave;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>luch liefer would I trust you thus never to behave."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>I can in nowise help it," the brave man said thereto;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In battle I must meet you, since so I swore to do.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>low guard yourselves, bold heroes, as ye your lives hold dear;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rom me the wife of Etzel would no refusal hear."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Too late dost thou forswear us/' the great king answer made;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Thou, Riideger most noble, by God shalt be repaid</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For all the love and fealty that thou to us hast shown,—•</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If thou wilt in thy kindness still to the end go on.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" And we'll be aye beholden, for all that thou didst give,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Myself and eke my kinsfolk, if thou'lt but let us live;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Those precious gifts thou gavest, what time, in good faith, here</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To Etzel's land thou ledst us: think of it, Riideger! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" How gladly would I do it," said Riideger the thane;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" As willingly at this time as ever I was fain</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>My gifts in full abundance upon you to bestow;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>No blame should I thereover e'er need to undergo."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Then have thy way," said Gemot, " O noble Riideger!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For never yet to strangers a welcome kindlier</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By any host was bidden than thou to us didst give:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of that thou hast the profit if we should longer live."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Would God, most noble Gemot," said Riideger again,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" That ye were back in Rhineland, and I myself were slain</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With some degree of honour,—since I with you must fight!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>From friends have heroes never suffer'd such foul despite."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now God reward thee, Riideger," spake Gemot in reply,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" For those rich gifts thou gavest: I grieve that thou shouldst d</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If with thee there must perish a mind so virtuous too;—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Here carry I the weapon thou gavest me, hero true!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And never hath it fail'd me in all this struggle dread,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And many a knight hath fallen, beneath its edges, dead.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Strong is it and well-temper'd, a good and handsome blade;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>ween a gift so worthy by knight will ne'er be made.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And should we not persuade thee to come unto our side,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If friends of mine thou slayest who still within abide,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With thine own sword I'll smite thee and take away thy life:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thee, Riideger, I pity, and eke thy noble wife."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now would to God, Sir Gemot, that thus it e'en might be,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That all your will and purpose might 'be fulfill'd on me.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whereby your kinsmen longer might yet enjoy their life!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay! gladly would I trust you with daughter and with wife."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then spake the young Burgundian, the child of Ute fair:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Why do you thus. Sir Rudeger? All these who with me are</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To you are well-disposed; an evil course you take;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Your daughter fair too early a widow you will make.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" If you and your retainers in strife contend with me,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How grievously unfriendly will that appear to be!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In that beyond all others my faith in you I laid,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In such wise that your daughter my wife I would have made."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Unto your pledge be faithful, O prince of noble race,"</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Said Rudeger, " if haply God send you from this place;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Suffer not that the maiden for me atonement make;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Be pitiful towards her, for your own virtue's sake."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" That would I do right gladly," young Giselher replied:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" But these my high-born kinsmen who still are here inside,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If they at your hands perish, the friendship firmly knit</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With you and eke your daughter by me must be acquit."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Then God have mercy on us! " the gallant warrior spake.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thereon they raised their bucklers, as though a way to make,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By force, unto the strangers within Kriemhilda's hall.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then loudly from the stairway was Hagen heard to call:</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now for a while yet tarry, most noble Riideger; "</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Such were the words of Hagen: "we would again confer,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Myself and eke my masters,—forced by necessity:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How will it profit Etzel if we poor exiles die?</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>"I am in grievous trouble," yet Hagen said, " the shield</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That Lady Gotelinda gave me as mine to wield,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The Huns for me have batter'd and hack'd it out of hand:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In friendliness I brought it unto King Etzel's land.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" If so be God in heaven would grant me of His grace</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To hold as good a buckler once more before my face,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As that which thou dost handle, right noble Riideger,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>No longer in the combat need I a hauberk wear."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Right gladly would I serve thee as touching this my shield,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Durst I make thee the offer in spite of Dame Kriemhild.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But do thou take it, Hagen, and bear it on thine hand;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay! what if thou shouldst bring it to thy Burgundian land! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When he to give the buckler so readily agreed,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then were there eyes in plenty that with hot tears were red.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of gifts it was the latest that unto warrior e'er</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By Riideger was given, the lord of Bechelar.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>How fierce soe'er was Hagen, however hard in mood,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet stirr'd that gift his pity, with which the warrior good,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So nigh to his last moments, had freely him endow'd;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And with him fell to weeping full many a chieftain proud.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now God in Heaven reward thee, most noble Riideger;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The like of thee will never be met with anywhere,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Who unto exiled warriors so royally dost give:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>God grant that all thy virtue for evermore may live."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Woe 's me for this betiding! " said Hagen yet again:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"We've had to bear already so great a load of pain,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Must we with friends be striving? Now God our refuge be!"</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then made the margrave answer: " It grieves me bitterly."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Your gift I'll now requite you, most noble Riideger,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Howe'er these high-born warriors themselves towards you bear,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To wit that here in battle you ne'er shall feel my hand,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Though all by you should perish of the Burgundian land."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>In courtly wise he bent him, the worthy Riideger;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>On all sides they were weeping that such heart-sorrows were</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By no one to be mended:—a dread necessity!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The father of all virtues in Riideger would die.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then from the house-door speaking the minstrel Volker said:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Since my companion Hagen a truce with you has made,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To you I also promise safe-conduct from my hand;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For well have you deserved it since came we to the land.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" You must, most noble margrave, be messenger of mine.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>These ruddy golden armlets gave me the margravine,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That I should surely wear them here at the revelry:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>You must yourself behold them and witness bear for me."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>"Would God in Heaven allow it," then answer'd Riideger,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" The margravine should give you still more of such to wear I</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Unto my wife your message right gladly will I give—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thereof be ye not doubtful—if I to see her live."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And even whilst he promised, his buckler Riideger</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Raised: and in mood of madness no longer could forbear,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But rush'd upon the strangers,—a very warrior now;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And fast the mighty margrave dealt round him many a blow.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Aloof together standing Volker and Hagen stay'd.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>According to the promise the warriors twain had made.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet more, as gallant, found he waiting beside the door;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whence Riideger the battle began with trouble sore.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>With murderous intention he was allow'd therein</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By Gunther and by Gemot, who heroes should have been.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But Giselher aside stood, so great his sorrows were;—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For life he hoped, and therefore avoided Riideger.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Anon the margrave's liegemen nish'd forth upon the foe;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Like warriors true one saw them after their leader go;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They bore their keen-edged weapons ready in hand to wield,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And many a helm they shatter'd and many a noble shield.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Many the swift strokes also the weary warriors spent</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>On him of Bechelaren, that straight and surely went</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right through the bright mail armour, nigh to the very life;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And glorious deeds of daring achieved they in that strife.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When Riideger's noble comrades within had made their way,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Volker along with Hagen rush'd swiftly to the fray:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They gave to no one quarter, save to that single man.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The blood through helmets, shatter'd by hands of either, ran.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>How grimly in that chamber the clang of swords uprose,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And many of the shield-plates sprang off beneath their blows;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The jewels hack'd from off them fell on the bloody floor.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In such grim humour fought they as might be never more.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The lord of Bechelaren went up and down the hall.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As one who might in battle by strength accomplish all.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By Riideger's achievements that day it might be told</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He was indeed a warrior, right praiseworthy and bold.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Here also stood those warriors Gunther and Gemot too,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Who in the stress of battle full many a hero slew;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And Giselher and Dankwart,—the twain reck'd not for aught,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And so full many a warrior unto his last day brought.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Well Riideger bore witness that he was strong enow,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And brave, with proven armour; what heroes laid he low!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>'Twas seen by a Burgundian: wrath strove within him deep.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>On Riideger the noble then death began to creep.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Stout Gemot 'twas, who loudly the hero challenged then.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He cried unto the margrave: " Wilt thou of all my men</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Not one unscathed leave me, most noble Riideger?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>It moves me beyond measure; the sight I cannot bear.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now lo! the gift you gave me to your own ruin tends,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Since you have taken from me so many of my friends.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now turn towards me hither, thou noble, gallant man,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I'll make your gift avail me with all the skill I can."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Or ever that the margrave had won his way to him,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Mail coats that erst were shining must needs be spoilt and dim.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then either at the other, thirsting for honour, ran;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And each to guard his body from deadly wounds began.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Yet smote their swords so keenly, against them all was vain.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And then was Gemot stricken by Riideger the thane</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Athwart his flint-like helmet, till downward flow'd the blood;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>All in a trice repaid him that gallant knight and good.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Aloft the gift of Riideger in hand he swung; and though</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His own wound, too, was deadly, he dealt on him a blow</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right through his stalwart buckler unto his helmet's slot.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The fair Gotlinda's husband fell dead upon the spot.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>In sooth a gift so precious was worse requited ne'er;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The two fell slain together, Gemot and Riideger,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Like-fated in the combat, each by the other's stroke.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>When this great loss to Hagen was known, his wrath outbroke.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Thus spake the Tronian hero: " In evil plight are we!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In these two have we suffer'd so great an injury</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As ne'er can be o'ertided by peoples or by lands;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now hold we Riideger's chieftains as bail in luckless hands."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Woe on me for my brother, who here in death doth lie!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How cometh, every moment, some tale of misery!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And I must mourn for ever the noble Riideger:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The loss to me is double, and grievous 'tis to bear."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>So Giselher, beholding his lady's father dead :—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And they who still were living a grievous reckoning paid,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Death fell upon them sorely seeking to take his own;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of them from Bechelaren there lived ere long not one.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Now Giselher and Gunther and with them Hagen too,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Dankwart and Volker also,—all warriors good and true,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Came forward all together, to where the twain were laid:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then was there by the heroes great lamentation made.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Death sorely us despoileth," spake the lad Giselher:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" But make an end of weeping, and get we to the air</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To cool our mail-clad bodies, worn as we are with strife;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Here God, I ween, will grant us but scanty spell of life."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Some sitting, others leaning, one saw there many a thane.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They once again were idle: and round about them, slain.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Lay Riideger's companions. The uproar all was laid.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So long the silence lasted, that Etzel grew afraid.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Woe on me for such service! " then spake the royal wife:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" These folk are not so trusty that on our foeman's life</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Shall vengeance due be taken by Riideger's command:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He means to take them safely back to Burgundian land.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" What boots it us. King Etzel, that we with him and his</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Have shared whatever he wanted? The chief hath done amiss:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He who should wreak our vengeance, doth wish a peace to gain."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thereunto answer'd Volker, the all-accomplish'd thane:</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Not so, alas! the story, most noble queen, I rede;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And, dare I charge with falsehood a dame so nobly bred,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Thee, devilishly lying of Riideger, I heard;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For he and his companions from peace have sorely err'd.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" That which the king commanded he did so zealously,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That he and all his people dead in yon chamber lie.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now cast about, Kriemhilda, on errands whom to send!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For Riideger the hero hath served thee to the end.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>"And wilt thou not believe me, see it thou shalt anon!"</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And to her heartfelt sorrow so was it straightway done:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They bore the mangled hero before the king and queen.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The thanes of Etzel never so sad a sight had seen.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When they beheld the margrave thus borne before them dead,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>No penman could have written, nor elsewise could be said,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How manifold the mourning of women and of men,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Who one and all bore witness unto their heart-felt pain.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The sorrowing of Etzel so great was, that the noise</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Was even as a lion's,—the mighty king his voice</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So Hfted in his anguish: eke mourn'd his wife no less:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Good Riideger bewail'd they with utmost bitterness.</span></span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
