<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 30</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-30" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXXI.— HOW THEY WENT TO CHURCH.</h2>

1849. 
" So cold I feel my armour : " quoth Volker presently, 
" Methinks the night is wearing and soon will ended be ; 
I mark that by the breezes ; 'twill very soon be day." 
Then many a man awoke they who still in slumber lay. 

1850. 
The morning light broke over the guests within the hall. 
Hagen began on all sides the warriors to call, 
To know if to the Minster to matins they would fare. 
Meanwhile, in Christian fashion, the bells were chiming clear. 



3l6 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1851. 
So diverse was the chanting, thereby 'twas plain to see 
That Christians and heathens were not in unity. 
And yet the men of Gunther to church would go withal ; 
They from their beds together had risen one and all. 

1852. 
The warriors then array'd them in clothes so finely wrought, 
That better raiment never by heroes had been brought 
To any king's dominions. Ill did it Hagen please. 
Said he : " Now should ye, heroes, don other suits than these. 

1853. 
" Enough about the matter ye surely understand ; 
Ye should, instead of roses, bear weapons in the hand. 
For caps beset with jewels take shining helms and good; 
Since we are well-advised of wicked Kriemhild's mood. 

1854. 
" This day must we do battle, I will to you declare ; 
Instead of silken doublets, ye should your hauberks wear, 
And in the place of mantles take bucklers good and wide — 
That if they seek a quarrel, the brunt ye may abide. 

1855- 
" My well-beloved masters, your friends and kinsmen too, 
Go now unto the Minster, — that should ye gladly do — 
And pray to God Almighty in your distress and need : 
For know now, of a surety, that Death is nigh indeed. 

1856. 
" See, too, that ye forget not aught ill that ye have done. 
And with true zeal and duty stand ye before God's throne. 
Of this, right noble warriors, I warn ye well afore, 
Save God in Heaven may grant it, ye'll hear no masses more." 



XXXI.] HOW THEY WENT TO CHURCH. 317 

1857. 
They went unto the Minster, the princes with their men. 
But in the hallow'd precincts bold Hagen spake again 
And bade them halt, lest any should leave the company : 
*' None knoweth what the Hunfolk to us may do," said he ; 

1858. 
*' My friends, set down your bucklers upright before your feet, 
And answer ye to any who may unkindly greet 
With deep and deadly sword-stroke. Hark ye, to Hagen's rede, 
So will ye find it worthy to serve you in your need." 

1859. 
With that Hagen and Volker, the twain together, went 
In front of the great Minster. 'Twas done with this intent, 
That they might make it certain that the king's wife would need 
To crowd them as she enter'd : their mien was grim indeed. 

i860. 
Then came the land's Upholder, and eke his lady fair. 
And deck'd about the body with raiment rich and rare 
One saw the doughty warriors along with them go by ; 
The dust aloft was whirling from Kriemhild's chivalry. 

1861. 
Now when the mighty ruler in armour saw array'd 
The kings and their companions, how quickly then he said : 
*' Why thus my friends behold I marching with helmets on ? 
'T would grieve me, on my honour, had aught to them been done. 

1862. 
" I'll gladly make atonement, however they think good ; 
If any here have vext them in either heart or mood, 
I give them full assurance that sorely vext am I ; 
And whatsoe'er they bid me I'll do it readily.'* 



3l8 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1863. 
To this made answer Hagen : " By none have we been harm'd. 
It is my masters' custom to go thus fully arm'd 
To every courtly meeting, — until three days have run ; 
To Etzel we will tell it if aught to us be done." 

1864. 
This answer made by Hagen Kriemhilda heard right well. 
How hatefully upon him her sidelong glances fell ! 
Yet would she not more frankly her country's customs own, 
Though they to her a long time in Burgundy were known. 

1865. 
Yet though her hate towards him so cruel was and fell, 
If anyone to Etzel the truth had dared to tell, 
He doubtless had prevented what came to pass ere long : 
But none of them would tell it, her mastery was so strong. 

1866. 
Then with the queen advancing there came a mighty band ; 
But this same pair of warriors deign'd not to take their stand 
Two hand-breadths further backward, which made the Hunfolk 

wroth. 
Ay, they must press and jostle with those bold heroes both. 

1867. 
The chamberlains of Etzel were ill-content at this, 
And would upon the warriors have somewhat wrought amiss, 
If they had dared to do it the king's High Grace before. 
There was a mighty jostling, but so far nothing more. 

1868. 
When service now was ended and they would thence be gone, 
All suddenly on horseback appear'd full many a Hun ; 
And many a beauteous lady was with Kriemhilda seen ; 
Full seven thousand warriors came riding with the queen. 



:XXI.] HOW THEY WENT TO CHURCH. 319 

1869. 
riemhilda with her ladies within the window sat 
\.long with royal Etzel : well pleased was he thereat, 
rain would they see the jousting those doughty heroes show'd : 
\.y ! in the lists before them what warriors strange there rode ! 

1870. 

\nd thither had the marshal, the right brave Dankwart, too, 
I!ome with his squires attending : his lords' own retinue 
IVith him, too, he had taken from the Burgundian land, 
rhe steeds for the bold Niblungs well saddled were at hand. 

1871. 
iVhen they their steeds had mounted — the kings and every man — 
Forthwith the stalwart Volker to counsel them began, 
rhat all should tilt together after their country's mode ; 
[n course of which, thereafter, the chiefs right nobly rode. 

1872. 
For what the hero counsell'd they did not underrate, 
rhe crowding and the shouting were both exceeding great. 
^Vithin the wide inclosure was gather'd many a man ; 
rhen Etzel and Kriemhilda to gaze thereon began. 

1873. 
Six hundred knights together upon the field appear'd, 
rhe warriors of Dietrich, coming the guests toward, 
rhey thought with the Burgundians some knightly sport to try, 
A.nd would, had he allow'd it, have done it readily. 

1874. 
A.y me ! what goodly warriors forthwith towards them made ! 
But when to the lord Dietrich the news thereof was said, 
With Gunther's men forbade he that any sport should be. 
He fear'd for his retainers : and surely need had he. 



320 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1875. 
When they of Bern pass'd onward, and from the place had gone, 
The men from Bechelaren, of Riideger's, came on. 
Before the hall five hundred with shield on arm rode they : 
Well pleased had been the margrave could they have kept away. 

1876. 
Then wisely, as behoved him, he rode the host throughout. 
And said unto his warriors, they could no longer doubt 
But that the men of Gunther ill will towards them had : 
If they would leave the combat he would in truth be glad. 

1877. 
When these now had pass'd onward — high-mettled heroes bold — 
Came horsemen from Thuringia, as hath to us been told ; 
And then the knights of Denmark, a thousand gallant men ; 
One saw right many a lance-shaft fly in the onset then. 

1878. 
Then Haward came and Irnfried unto the tournament. 
The Rhinelanders a challenge to them had proudly sent. 
The warriors of Thuringia were offer'd many a joust ; 
In many a noble buckler were lances deeply thrust. 

1879. 
There, too, the lordly Bloedlin came with his thousands three. 
By Etzel and Kriemhilda right closely watch'd was he ; 
For all the knightly jousting was held within their sight. 
The queen rejoiced to see it for Burgundy's despite. 

1880. 
And Gibecke and Scrutan unto the melde rode, 
With Hornboge and Ramung, all in the Hunnish mode. 
They held the lists, withstanding the chiefs of Burgundy ; 
And over the king's palace the shafts went whirling high. 



XXXI.] HOW THEY WENT TO CHURCH. 321 



Whate'er was done by any was nothing else but sound. 
Loud was the din that echo'd palace and hall around, 
From clash of shields and bucklers, by Gunther's liegemen made 3 
Whence praises and great honour unto his folk were paid. 

1882. 
The ardour of their pastime so mighty was and great, 
That from the goodly horses whereon the heroes sate 
The snow-white foam was soaking through the caparisons. 
In every courtly fashion they sought to meet the Huns. 

1883. 
Then up and spake the minstrel, Volker the fiddle-player : 
*'I trow that to withstand us these warriors will not dare. 
I've ever heard it said that they hate us verily ; 
Now is the time to show it ; ? better ne'er will be. 

1884. 
*' Straightway unto the stables," so Volker loudly cried, 
" We'll have the horses taken ; till towards the eventide 
We'll ride some further courses, if there be time enow. 
What if to us Burgundians the queen some praise allow ! " 

1885. 
Then saw they some one coming ; with stately mien rode he. 
Such that no other Hunsman with him compared could be. 
Belike in some high lattice a sweetheart there he had ; 
No knightly bride was ever than he more fairly clad, 

1886. 
Then Volker said : " How can I pass over such a chance? 
Yon darling of the ladies must feel a thrust of lance, — 
There 's not a man could help it ! 'twill stand him in his life : 
I care not though I anger thereby King Etzel's wife." 

Y 



322 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1887. 
" For love of me, forbear ye ! " King Gunther quickly spake ; 
" These people will upbraid us if we the onset make ; 
Let ye the Huns begin it, more seemly 'twere, I ween." 
Now all this time King Etzel was sitting by the queen. 

1888. 
" I'll make the hubbub greater," quoth Hagen, in his turn ; 
"We needs must let the ladies and these same champions learn 
How we can sit our horses : 'twill be good sport withal, 
Though little praise to any of Gunther's men befall." 

1889. 
Then rode the ready Volker into the fray again : 
Whereby had many a woman, ere long, right grievous pain. 
The noble Hunsman's body transfix'd he with his spear ; 
Which soon both wife and maiden bewail'd with many a tear. 

1890. 
With hurtling speed did Hagen rush forward with his men, 
His sixty chosen warriors ; and quickly rode he then 
Upon the fiddler's footsteps, to where the joust was held. 
Both Etzel and Kriemhilda plainly the whole beheld. 

1891. 
The kings were all unwilling their minstrel brave to leave 
Amid the foemen fighting, and succour none to give ; 
A thousand heroes therefore towards him deftly rode, — 
In high-accomplish'd fashion they did whate'er they would. 

1892. 
When that the noble Hunsman in death was stricken low, 
One heard among his kinsmen complaints and cries of woe. 
And all the folk were asking : *' Who can this deed have done ? " 
" Volker, the fearless minstrel, yon fiddler is the one ! " 



XXXI.] HOW THEY WENT TO CHURCH. 323 

1893. 
For swords and bucklers called they, and held them soon in hand, 
The kinsmen of this margrave of the Hungarian land. 
They would have set on Volker, and slain him where he stood ; 
The host ran from his window with all the haste he could. 

1894. 
Then rose a mighty tumult among the people all. 
The kings and their attendants dismounted at the hall ; 
Behind the throng his charger sent each Burgundian ; 
King Etzel came : to sever the nobles he began. 

1895. 
From one of the Hun's kinsmen, who chanced by him to stand, 
He seiz'd a deadly weapon, and wrench'd it from his hand ; 
Then drave the people backwards, for very wroth was he : 
*• How vain unto these warriors had been my courtesy 

1896. 
" If ye had slain the minstrel before my very face ; " 
So spake to them King Etzel : " that were a foul disgrace ! 
For well I marked him riding, what time he pierced the Hun, 
And through no fault on his part, but by a slip, 'twas done. 

1897. 
" To leave my guests in freedom, I charge ye to take heed.** 
So gave he them safe-conduct ; then led they every steed 
Unto the hostel stables ; and many squires they had 
Right diligent in service, who did whate'er they bade. 

1898. 
The host into the palace took with his friends his way. 
No wrath in any of them would he allow to stay. 
The tables were made ready, the water was brought in : 
Yet bitter foes in plenty had they from o'er the Rhine. 



324 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1899. 
Ere all the lords were seated a good long time was spent ; 
Whilst tortured was Kriemhilda by cares within her pent. 
She said : " I seek thy counsel, O prince of Bern, thy grace 
And aid : in sooth my business is now in evil case." 

1900. 
Then Hildebrand made answer, a worthy warrior he : 
" Whoever slays the Niblungs shall have no help from me, 
Nay, not for any treasure ! thereby he grief may get : 
These knights of ready courage have ne'er been conquer'd yet." 

1901. 
And, in his courtly fashion, thereto Sir Dietrich spake : 
"O mighty queen, I pray thee, thy purpose to forsake. 
To me thy kinsmen never have done such injury, 
That I the gallant warriors in combat would defy. 

1902. 
" The wish doth ill beseem thee, most noble prince's wife, 
That thou anent thy kinsfolk wouldst plot against their life. 
Trusting unto thy favour they came unto this land : 
Siegfried is not avenged by aid of Dietrich's hand." 

1903. 
When she could find no falseness the knight of Bern within, 
Then on the spot she promised to give to Bloedelin 
A far-extending march-land, which Nudung own'd of yore. 
As Dankwart shortly slew him, he thought of it no more. 

1904. 
Quoth she : " Thou ought'st to aid me, my good Sir Bloedelin, 
For in this very palace are now these foes of mine 
Who slew my husband Siegfried, so well-beloved of me. 
To him who helps avenge him, I ever bound shall be." 



XXXI.] HOW THEY WENT TO CHURCH. 325 

1905. 
To her then answer'd Bloedel : " Lady, be sure of this, 
To them, for fear of Etzel, I dare do naught amiss. 
Since he thy kinsmen happy is ever fain to see. 
And did I aught to hurt them, he ne'er would pardon me." 



1906. 
" Nay, rather, my lord Bloedel, your friend I'll ever be. 
Guerdon of gold and silver I will bestow on thee ; 
And eke a lovely damsel — Nudung's betrothed bride — 
Whom thou mayst love and cherish right gladly at thy side. 

1907. 
"The land, too, and the castles, all unto thee I give ; 
So, noble knight, thou mayest in gladness ever live, 
If thou but winn'st the earldom which Nudung held in fee. 
Whate'er to-day I promise, in truth I'll give to thee." 

1908. 
When now the noble Bloedel the guerdon heard her tell, 
And seeing that the damsel in beauty pleased him well, 
By means of strife he purposed to earn this lovely wife : 
But for that cause the warrior was doom'd to lose his life. 

1909. 
Unto the queen then spake he : " Within the hall go back ; 
Ere any guess my purpose, an uproar I will make. 
Hagen will have to answer for what to you he wrought ; 
King Gunther's man, I warrant, shall bound to you be brought." 

1910. 

" Now arm yourselves," cried Bloedel, " my gallant liegemen all ! 
We will upon the foemen within the hostel fall ; 
I may not be acquitted of this by Etzel's wife. 
On this must every hero among us stake his life." 



326 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [aD\ 

1911. 
When the queen found that Bloedel was on the fray intent, 
She tarried there no longer, but back to table went 
And sat beside King Etzel and with his men as well : 
She for the guests' undoing had taken counsel fell. 

1912. 
Since means there were not elsewise to cause the strife to start, 
(Kriemhilda's olden sorrow lay graven in her heart) 
She bade them bring to table King Etzel's little son : 
How could a vengeful woman more cruelly have done ? 

1913- 
Then went that self-same minute of Etzel's liegemen four, 
And thither from his chamber the young king Ortlieb bore 
Unto the prince's table, where Hagen also sate. 
(The boy was doom'd to perish through Hagen's deadly hate.) 

1914. 
As soon as mighty Etzel espied his little son, 
He turned to his wife's kinsmen and spake in kindly tone : 
" Now, my good friends, behold ye, my only son is he. 
And eke your sister's offspring : which well for you may be. 

1915- 
" If he his kindred likens, he'll be a gallant wight, 
Right powerful and noble, a well-grown man of might. 
Should I live some while longer he'll own a dozen lands ; 
So look ye for good service at my young Ortlieb's hands. 

1916. 
" I therefore fain would pray you, O well-loved friends of mine^ 
When ye are homeward riding unto the river Rhine, 
That ye upon the journey would take your sister's son, 
And let your loving kindness unto the child be shown. 



XXXII.] HOW BLOEDELIN WAS SLAIN. 327 

1917. 
" And rear him up in honour till he to manhood grow. 
If any in your borders hath wrought you any woe, 
When he is of full stature he will your vengeance aid." 
King Etzel's wife Kriemhilda heard also what he said. 

1918. 
** If unto days of manhood the child should grow and thrive, 
These thanes, I trow," said Hagen, " their trust to him will give. 
Yet the young king, meseemeth, is of a weakly sort : 
Folk will not often see me attending Ortlieb's court." 

1919. 
The king look'd round at Hagen, — this speech had vext him 

sore; 
And though, with princely breeding, he spake thereof no more, 
His heart was very heavy and troubled was his mind. 
Nor was the mood of Hagen a whit to joy inclined. 

1920. 
The princes all were sorry, together with the king, 
That of his child had Hagen e'er spoken such a thing. 
With ill content they bore it : nor knew they aught at all 
Of what through this same warrior was shortly to befall. 



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
