<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 33</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-33" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXXIII.— HOW THE BURGUNDIANS FOUGHT WITH THE HUNS</h2>
			<p>
				<span><span>Within the door an entrance thus gallant Dankwart made;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The household folk of Etzel to stand aside he bade.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The whole of his apparel bespatter'd was with gore;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A mighty naked weapon within his hand he bore.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then loudly Dankwart shouted before the assembled throng:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"Bestir thee, brother Hagen, thou sittest all too long!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To thee and God in Heaven appeal I in our need:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yeomen and knights together lie in the hostel dead."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And he cried back in answer: '• And who hath done it then? "</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Quoth Dankwart: " The Lord Bloedel, together with his men.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But dearly hath he paid it, that would I have you know.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I smote his head from off him; mine own hand gave the blow."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" 'Tis but a little grievance," quoth Hagen of Tronje;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Whene'er one has occasion of any thane to say,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That he by hands of warrior was of his life fordone,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So much the less fair women for him have need to moan.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now tell me, brother Dankwart, why all so red ye be?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Methinks that thou art wounded and sufifer'st grievously.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If in the land he liveth who this on thee hath done,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Except the foul fiend save him, his life 's as good as gone."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" You see me whole and hearty; with blood my clothes are red,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But from the wounds of others it thus hath happened;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And they have been so many that I have slain to-day,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That verily their number on oath I could not say."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>He answer'd: " Brother Dankwart, see to the door do thou,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And let not of the Hunsmen a single man come through.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I'll reckon with these warriors, as need we have, in faith!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Our men-at-arms are lying in undeserved death."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" If chamberlain I must be," the gallant man replied,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" To serve such mighty rulers, I am well satisfied.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I'll answer for the stairway, as honour 's dear to me."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Unto Kriemhilda's warriors naught could more direful be.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" It is to me a marvel," Hagen thereafter spake:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"What meaneth all the fluster these Hunnish warriors make?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They think they well could spare him, who yonder door doth hold.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And hath these high concernments to the Burgundians told!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Long time about Kriemhilda have I been wont to hear,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That she her bitter sorrow was not content to bear.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now drink we to her darling! for royal wine we'll call!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The princeling of the Hunfolk shall be the first of all! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then the child Ortlieb slew he, Hagen, that warrior good.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So that from sword-blade downward flow'd o'er his hands the blood;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The infant's head was sever'd and on the queen's lap fell.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then rose amongst the warriors a slaughter horrible.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>With double-handed sword-stroke he dealt a blow at large</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Against the man of learning, who had the child in charge.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His head all in a moment before the table lay:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In good sooth for the teacher it was but sorry pay I</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>He saw by Etzel's table a certain minstrel-man,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And Hagen in his fury to fall on him began;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His left hand on the fiddle he lopp'd off suddenly:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" There 's somewhat thou canst carry for news to Burgundy! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Woe for my hand! " cried Werbel the minstrel: " wilt thou say</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>What evil I have done thee, Lord Hagen of Tronje?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In all good faith I journey 'd unto your master's land;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The notes how can I finger since I have lost my hand? "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>But little heeded Hagen, though he ne'er fiddled more.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He wreak'd within the palace a vengeance grim and sore</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Upon the knights of Etzel, of whom a host he slew.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Death dealt he in the palace to people not a few.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The ever-ready Volker up from the table sprang:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And in his hand right loudly his fiddle-bow outrang.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right fearsome was the music that Gunther's minstrel play'd;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay! 'mid the gallant Hunsmen what enemies he made!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Upsprang, too, from the table, the noble rulers three:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They gladly would have stay'd it, ere mischief worse should be.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But all their wit avail'd not the rising storm to quell,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>When Volker joining Hagen to such wild raving fell.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When saw the Lord of Rhineland the fight could not be stay'd,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The prince himself fought also, and many a wide wound made</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Upon his foemen's bodies, their shining mail-coats through.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A hand-strong hero was he: as now all grimly knew.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The stalwart Gemot likewise was forward in the strife;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay! he among the Hunsmen took many a hero's life,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A keen-edged weapon wielding,—by Riideger 'twas given.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By him were Etzel's warriors right grievously bedriven.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The young son of Dame Ute into the fight now dash'd,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And gloriously his broadsword right through the helmets crash'd,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To grief of Etzel's warriors of the Hungarian land.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>There wrought were many marvels by gallant Gis'lher's hand.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Howe'er the kings and liegemen were valiant in the fight,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Above them all right plainly did Giselher in might</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Stand forth against the foemen; he was a hero good.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Such wounds he dealt, that many fell weltering in their blood.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The men of Etzel also stood stoutly to the foe.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>There one might see the strangers go hacking to and fro</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With their bright glancing weapons, all through the royal hall.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And horrid shrieks from all sides upon the ear did fall.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>They who were on the outside would to their friends within;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But found that at the doorways small vantage they could win.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Out from the hall right gladly would they within it fare:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But none of them would Dankwart let up or down the stair.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Thereby around the gateways a mighty press arose,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And din of helmets also beneath the broadsword blows.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And thus the gallant Dankwart fell into sore distress:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But that his brother heeded, as bound in faithfulness.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>For thereupon to Volker Sir Hagen cried aloud:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Now look you yonder, comrade, how round my brother crowd</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The Hunnish warriors closely, and blows upon him rain:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Friend, go and help my brother, or we shall lose the thane."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" That will I do full surely," answer'd the minstrelman;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And straightway through the palace his fiddling he began.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His hand with his stout broadsword full often music made;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To him the Rhenish warriors unbounded thanks repaid.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And soon the gallant Volker to Dankwart came and said:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" To-day no little trouble hath fallen on your head.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Your brother hath enjoin'd me to lend a helping hand:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If you'll look to the outside, within the door I'll stand."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Dankwart the ever-ready without the gateway stood;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Well guarded he the stairway, let any come who would.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>One heard the clang of weapons in the bold hero's hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The like, within, did Volker of the Burgundian land.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Loudly the valiant minstrel shouted across the throng:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" The hall is closed, friend Hagen, with bolt and barrier strong.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The door of Etzel's chamber is safely barr'd as well:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Two heroes' hands that hold it a thousand bolts excel."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When Hagen, Lord of Tronj, knew that the door was fast,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His shield back on his shoulders the goodly chieftain cast.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>First fell he to avenging the ills upon him wrought:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of longer life his foemen had then but little thought.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The Prince of Bern no sooner had seen how matters went,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And how the mighty Hagen so many helmets rent,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Than sprang the Amelung ruler upon a bench: quoth he:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" The liquor Hagen giveth is vile as drink can be! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The host was full of sorrow—good cause had he to rue:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>What friends of him beloved before his eyes they slew!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And hardly from his foemen unscath'd himself came he;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In grief he sat—what profit was it a king to be?</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The mighty Queen Kriemhilda to Dietrich call'd and said;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" With all your manhood give me, O noble knight, your aid.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By all those princes' merits erewhile of Amelung land:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Should Hagen once have reach'd me, my death were close at hand.'</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" And how am I to help you," Lord Dietrich answering said,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Great queen, when I have reason myself to be afraid?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>These followers of Gunther with wrath so sorely burn,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That I with no one's safety can now myself concern."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Nay, say not so. Lord Dietrich, thou noble knight and good,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>This day make plain to all men thy kind and virtuous mood,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In that thou hence wilt help me: or I am like to die."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Her fears had brought Kriemhilda to sore anxiety.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Can I do aught to help you, I verily will try;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Since never have I witness'd, for many years gone by,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To such deep wrath enkindled so many a warrior good.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay! through the riven helmets I see the surging blood."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>This thane of proven valour with power began to shout;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Like unto horn of bison his voice rang loudly out,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Until its strength re-echoed the wide-wall'd stronghold round.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The mightiness of Dietrich was great beyond all bound.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When Gunther heard the clamour proceeding from this man</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Above the noise of battle, to hearken he began.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Said he: " The voice of Dietrich is to my hearing plain;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I trow that our retainers some friend of his have slain.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" I see him on the table, he beckons with his hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ye friends of mine and kinsfolk from the Burgundian land,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Cease fighting for a season, and let one hear and see</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>What to the thane hath happen'd through them who follow me."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And when the royal Gunther besought and gave command,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They, in the stress of battle, halted with sword in hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So great the power he wielded, not one durst strike a blow</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whilst him of Bern he challenged, with readiness enow.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Said he: " Most noble Dietrich, what hath to you been done</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By any of my people? I'm willing, be it known.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Amends and satisfaction right readily to give.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Were any man to wrong you, right deeply should I grieve."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then answer'd the Lord Dietrich: " Naught hath been done to me;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But let me leave the palace with your safe-conduct free,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And get with my retainers from this fell strife away:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For that I'll owe you service assuredly for aye."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then unto him spake Wolf hart: " Why ask ye grace so soon?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That door, I trow, the fiddler hath not so closely done</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But we can force it open enough to get away."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"Now hold thy peace," cried Dietrich, "the devil thou dost play."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then spake the royal Gunther: " That will I let you do.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Out of this place depart ye, many be ye or few,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But not a single foeman—here stay they everyone.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They have anent these Hunsfolk so basely to me done."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When Dietrich heard that saying, he took beneath his arm</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The noble queen, sore stricken with sorrow and alarm.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Upon his other arm he took Etzel with him then;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>There also went with Dietrich six hundred goodly men.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then up and spake the margrave, the noble Riideger:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" If any from the palace be yet allowed to fare.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Who still are fain to serve you, to us let it be known:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For thus may peace enduring betwixt good friends be sown."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Whereto made answer Gis'lher, of the Burgundian land:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" To you shall peace and pardon be granted at our hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Since you and your retainers were e'er of faithful heart.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>You all shall, unmolested, hence with your friends depart."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When Riideger the margrave departed from the hall,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Five hundred men went with him or more, belike, in all,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Who came from Bechelaren, liegemen and friends as well;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By whom unto King Gunther great mischief soon befell.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Meanwhile a Hunnish warrior, who saw how Etzel went</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By Dietrich's side, to profit thereby was all intent;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But with his sword the minstrel fetch'd at him such a slice,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That at the feet of Etzel his head lay in a trice.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When that the country's ruler had got outside the place.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He stopp'd and look'd behind him towards where Volker was:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Woe 's me for this dread stranger; a cruel destiny</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>It is that all my warriors must dead before him lie I</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" And woe upon this feasting," the noble sovran cried,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" For one, by name of Volker, is fighting there inside</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Like to a savage boar, and yet a minstrel he!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I thank my Lord and Saviour I'm from that devil free!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Right evil sound his measures, his strokes are bloody red;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay, and his tunes have smitten full many a hero dead.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I know not what against us this minstrel doth attest,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For never have I harbour'd so downright ill a guest! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>They'd let from out the palace as many as they chose;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then from the folk within it a fearful din arose.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The guests for what had happen'd a dire revenge would have.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay! Volker the undaunted, what helmets then he clave!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Gunther, the noble ruler, turn'd at that noise around:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"Hear'st thou yon music, Hagen, which Volker there doth sound</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Amid the Hunfolk fiddling, who through the door would go?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He hath a blood-red straker upon his fiddle-bow! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" It grieves me beyond measure," Hagen in answer spake,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" That I before that warrior a seat in hall should take.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I have been his companion, as he was likewise mine,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And we shall aye be faithful if hence we ever win.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now mark, great king, how Volker doth thee and thine uphold</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right willingly he earneth thy silver and thy gold.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Through steel of hardest temper his fiddle-bow will smite;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He breaks from off the helmets their shining crests and bright.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" I never saw a fiddler so nobly hold his own</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As this same warrior Volker throughout the day hath done.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>On helmet and on buckler his music ringeth clear:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A gallant horse deserves he and raiment rich to wear."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Of those of Hunnish kindred who had been in that hall,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Not one was left within it alive amongst them all.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now silenced was the uproar; for none there were to fight;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Aside was laid the weapon of every gallant knight.</span></span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
