<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure VI.— HOW GUNTHER WENT TO ICELAND AFTER BRUNHILDA</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Fresh rumours now were coming from over Rhine: for there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As all the folk were saying was many a maiden fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of these was good King Gunther now thinking one to woo,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And high his knightly ardour rose, as this purpose grew.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There was a great queen, dwelling, somewhere beyond the sea,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whose like none had seen ever, and ne'er again would see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She was of matchless beauty, and strong withal of make;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She shot with ready warriors, and made her love the stake.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A stone she hurl'd far from her, then after it would spring;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He, who her love did covet, must, without wavering,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Win three games in succession from her, the highborn maid;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And if he failed in any, his head was forfeited.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus many a time and often the maid was wont to do.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas one day heard in Rhineland, by a good knight and true.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who turned his thoughts towards her, and sought to win the dame,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Through whom full many a hero to death foredoomed came.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upspake the Lord of Rhineland: " I'll go down to the sea,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And visit this Brunhilda, howe'er it fare with me!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For love of her I'm ready to venture limb and life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I am content to lose them if she be not my wife."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"From that would I dissuade you! " in answer Siegfried said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"In sooth this queen hath customs so terrible and dread,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That whosoever woos her must pay a price too high;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seek not to take this journey, I counsel earnestly! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now I would fain advise you," thus Hagen to him spake, -</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"To bid Siegfried go with you, and half the burden take,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And share your risk and danger; I counsel this in faith.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since he such good acquaintance with Brunhild's customs hath."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Quoth Gunther: " Wilt thou help me in very truth, Siegfried,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To woo and win this fair one? ah, if thou dost indeed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Get her for my betrothed, my own, my noble wife,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, for thy sake, I'll venture mine honour and my life! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For answer gave him Siegfried, the royal Siegmund's son:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Giv'st thou to me thy sister, behold, it shall be done!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Give me the lovely Kriemhild, the high and noble queen;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No guerdon for my labour, save this I care to win."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"That swear I to thee, Siegfried," cried Gunther " on thine hand!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And if the fair Brunhilda doth come here to this land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll give my sister to thee, to have and hold for wife:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So mayst thou, with thy fair one, aye lead a joyous life."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By solemn oath they swore it, the noble warriors twain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But they had toilsome labour, and grief enough, and pain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the high-bom lady home to the Rhine they brought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gallant knights' achievement must be with sorrow wrought.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried his hood of darkness, Tarnhelm yclept, must take:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The same that the bold hero, after hard fight, did make</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His own, from a dwarf wrested, whose name was Alberich.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The bold and mighty warriors sped on their journey quick.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whene'er the gallant Siegfried the wondrous Tarnhelm wore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A hidden strength was in him he had not known before:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He had the strength of twelve men, joined to his own, 'twas said;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And cunningly he plotted to win the noble maid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now this same hood was fashion'd in such a wondrous way</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That any man who wore it could carry out straightway</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever thing he wanted, whilst no man could him see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therewith he won Brunhilda; whence mickle woe had he.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now answer me," thane Siegfried, " ere yet our way begin,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How shall we, with due honour, across the water win?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should we not take our warriors unto Brunhilda's land?—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full thirty thousand have I, who soon may be to hand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"How many folk soever we take there," Siegfried said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"This queen doth cherish customs so terrible and dread.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they will all fall victims to her o'erweening mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll give thee better counsel, thou fearless knight and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Let us, as plain knights-errant, go sailing down the Rhine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I will name unto thee the knights we'll take of thine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Besides us two, two others shall go, none else at all:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So shall we win the lady, whatever may befall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I one of these four comrades, another shall be thou;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The third had best be Hagen, we should do well enow.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And let the fourth be Dankwart, he hath a dauntless hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand others dare not in fight us four withstand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>I would I had some knowledge," the king said,—" verily,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere we from hither journey, 'twould much enhearten me,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In what apparel should we before Brunhild appear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What would be right and fitting? that, Siegfried, would I hear."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Whatever be most handsome is worn, I understand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By ev'ry man, at all times, in Queen Brunhilda's land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore should we go finely before this haughty dame,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That when men talk about us we need not blush for shame."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then cried the good king, " Surely, I will myself go ask</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My own dear, gracious mother, that she do set the task</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To her fair maids, to make us such garb, wherein array'd</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We may appear with honour before the royal maid."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen, knight of Tronje, in courtly fashion spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Why trouble you your mother with things to undertake?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let your fair sister hear now all that you have in mind.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her aid, in this state journey, you will of service find."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So sent he to his sister; saying, he fain would see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her face, as would Sir Siegfried. But, long ere this, had she</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Put on her goodHest raiment; and stood, so fair a maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow that at their coming she was not much dismay'd!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Also her court-attendants array'd were as was meet</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When princes twain were coming; and as she heard their feet,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Straight from her chair upstanding right modestly she went</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To greet the noble comers with fitting compliment.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Right welcome is my brother, and his companion eke;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But fain would I have knowledge," thus did the maiden speak,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"What is your lordships' pleasure that ye at court appear?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With you two noble warriors how stands it? let me hear."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake King Gunther: "Lady, to you the truth I'll tell:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Although we have high courage, yet have we cares as well.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For we would go a-courting, far in a foreign land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now, unto this journey, fine raiment would command."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"So sit you down, dear brother," bade the king's daughter fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"And who may be the ladies, for I would rightly hear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom you would go a- wooing in other ruler's land? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These favour'd knights the lady did take now by the hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And with them straight returned to where she sat afore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rich mattresses, I doubt not were spread upon the floor.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With pictures fair embroidered, set off with golden thread.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then must they with the ladies a pleasant time have had.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And friendly mutual glances, and looks that were not loth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Caused many a thought to waken within the hearts of both.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He in his heart aye bore her, dear as his very life;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And soon, by steadfast service, he won her for his wife.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The rich king spake unto her: " O dearest sister mine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This thing that we have purposed fails without help of thine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In Queen Brunhilda's country some pleasure we desire;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And need, in ladies' presence, the goodliest attire."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the maiden answer: " Beloved brother mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ready am I, at all times, to serve, in need of thine;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of that thou mayst be certain: it is Kriemhilda's part.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should any one deny thee 'twould vex her to the heart.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Nor shouldst thou, noble hero, beg of me anxiously,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou shouldst command my service, in lordly style and free.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For whatsoever please thee, for that I'm ready aye,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And gladly will I do it; " the maiden sweet did say.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"'Tis our desire, dear sister, in goodly garb to stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which you may help provide us, with your own noble hand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So set your women working, that all may be well done,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For we about this journey will be gainsaid by none."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake again the maiden: '' Now mark what I shall say!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I have the silk already: see that we get, straightway,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Some gems from off your bucklers: we'll work them on the cloth."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Gunther and Sir Siegfried obeyed her, nothing loth.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And who may be the comrades," inquired the royal maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Who shall to court go with you, thus gorgeously arrayed? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I and three more," he answered, " and two my men will be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Dankwart and Sir Hagen;— these go to court with me.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And mark you well, dear lady, and list to what I say!—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We four companions must have enough for four days' stay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Three shifts of clothing daily, of good stuff all of it,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That we Brunhilda's country without disgrace may quit."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With kind farewells the heroes soon after did depart.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, of her maidens, thirty, well skilled in needle-art,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Did the young queen Kriemhilda call from their room, in haste;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These all for such-like labours had wit beyond the rest!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Arabian samite was there, white as new-fallen snow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Zazemang silks also,—so green doth clover grow,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereon they wrought the jewels; fine clothes, in sooth, they were;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The peerless maid, Kriemhilda, herself the cloth did shear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of foreign fish-skin made they the linings, good and rare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For stranger-folk to stare at,—as many as there were;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And these with silk were covered, as then the mode did hold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There might be many a marvel of this bright raiment told.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From far Morocco's borders, and from the Libyan shore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The very choicest samite, that e'er enriched the store</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of any king soever,—this had they, and to spare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right plainly showed Kriemhilda to whom she kindness bare!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Since they on this state journey determined to set forth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Plain ermine furs they reckoned of insufficient worth.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So over them fur trimmings of coal-black hue they set:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On high-days such like garments brave knights right well befit.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Amidst Arabian gold-work there glittered many a gem.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So careful were the women, naught was too small for them.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In seven weeks the raiment was all prepared aright,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke the weapons thereto for every gallant knight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When this was all made ready, upon the banks of Rhine</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was diligently fashion'd a little vessel, fine</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And strong, which down the river should bear them to the sea.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble maids by this time were of their tasks weary.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas told unto the warriors that all things were to hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they were to take with them;— all their apparel grand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such as they had desired; it all was now complete:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So would they on the Rhine-bank no longer stay their feet.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore, to fetch their comrades, a messenger was bade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they should come and look on this raiment newly made;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It might be, for the heroes, too long, or else too small.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But 'twas of the right measure: they thanked the ladies all.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For all who came and saw it were bounden to confess,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In all the world they never had seen more noble dress.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They might be proud such clothing in any court to wear;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of finer knights' apparel, in sooth, knew no one there.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thanks manifold and hearty their judgment did receive.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then these joyous warriors desired to take their leave;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This did the noble comrades with knightly courtesy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bright eyes were then, with weeping, all sad and watery.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: " My dearest brother, you still have time to stay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And woo some other woman, 'twould be the better way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You would not then endanger your body and your life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Here might you find, much nearer, as highly-born a wife! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Her heart, I ween, foreboded what, later, did befall:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As ev'ry word was spoken they fell to weeping all.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gold upon their bosoms was tarnished with the tears</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which rained from their eyelids, by reason of their fears.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Again she spake: " Sir Siegfried, let me commend, I pray,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto your truth and kindness, my brother dear alway;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That no mischance befall him in Queen Brunhilda's land."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gallant hero swore it, upon Kriemhilda's hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The mighty thane thus answered: " So long as I shall live,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You, to his safety, lady, no anxious thought need give;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I safe and sound will bring him home to the Rhine; " he said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That know now of a surety." The fair maid bow'd her head.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their gilded shields were carried straight down unto the shore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And to the ship was taken of clothing their whole store;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They bade men bring their horses, they hasted to be gone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was by beauteous women much bitter weeping done.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There, standing, at the windows, was many a lovely child;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A high wind fair was blowing—the ship's sail soon was fiU'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gallant band of heroes on Rhine were floating free;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the royal Gunther: " Who now shall skipper be? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"That will I be! " cried Siegfried, " for I can down the flood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right well and safely steer you, doubt not, ye heroes good;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The proper water-channels, I well do understand."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then joyously they parted from the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Siegfried took a boathook, and stoutly did it grip,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, leaning on it strongly, from strand he shoved the ship;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The mighty man. King Gunther, did likewise seize an oar.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And soon these worthy heroes had cleared them from the shore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They carried costly viands, and plenty of good wine,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The best that had been vintaged upon the banks of Rhine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their horses stood right firmly,—they had a well-found stall ;■ -</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their vessel voyaged smoothly; small ill did them befall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then they unfurl'd the sailcloths,—the stout sails, strained and tight,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And twenty miles they sailed, or ever it was night.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With a good wind to help them down stream, toward the sea.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their steadfast toil was later those brave ones' woe to be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the twelfth day morning, as we have heard men say.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The wind had borne the vessel far distant, and away</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Toward Isenstein the fortress, in Queen Brunhilda's land:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To all of them, save Siegfried, it was an unknown strand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now, when the royal Gunther so many towers did see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke so wide a marchland, he spake, all suddenly:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Tell me, my good friend Siegfried, if it be known to thee,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whose are these many castles, and this fair land we see? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then answered Siegfried: " Truly it is to me well known:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This people and this country doth Queen Brunhilda own,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Isenstein's her fortress, as you have heard me say;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many comely women you well might see this day.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I'll give ye heroes counsel all of one mind to be,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Agree in all your discourse,—so seemeth best to me.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If we to-day, as may be, before Brunhilda go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We shall need all our prudence to deal with her, I trow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"When we behold that fair one, attended by her train,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One speech, and but one only, ye heroes must maintain:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther is my chieftain, and of his men I'm one;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thereby what he hath purposed shall all be duly done."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They ready were to promise whate'er he asked of them;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all their pride o'erweening none did his word contemn.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They vowed whate'er he wanted: so better did they fare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What time the royal Gunther beheld Brunhilda fair.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"This not so much for thy sake, I do," Sir Siegfried said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"As for love of thy sister,—the ever-beauteous maid!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She's as my soul unto me, and as my very life;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll gladly do this service, so her I win to wife I "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
