<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-25" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXV.— HOW THE LORDS ALL WENT TO THE HUNS</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now let us leave the story of how they prosper'd there.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere then did never warriors of higher courage fare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In such like state and splendour through any king's domain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of armour and apparel all had as they were fain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warden of the Rhineland equipped his warriors bold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand knights and sixty, so is the story told,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With men-at-arms nine thousand for this great festival.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They whom they left behind them ere long bewail'd them all.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their riding gear they carried to Worms across the court.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereon an aged bishop of Spires spake in this sort</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the comely Ute: " Our friends have mind to fare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto this high assembly: God guard their honour there! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon unto her children did noble Ute say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Ye should, my noble heroes, be here content to stay:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I dreamt a dream this morning, of great dismay and dread;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How all the winged creatures within this land were dead."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Who puts his faith in dreamings," then Hagen made reply,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Knows not the proper meaning that may within them lie,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When honour, peradventure, may wholly be at stake.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'm willing that my masters for court their leave should take.'"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"We should indeed with gladness ride unto Etzel's land:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There kings can have the service of many a hero's hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When there we take our part in Kriemhilda's revelry."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hagen the journey counsell'd: he rued it presently.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He would have been against it, if Gernot had not sought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With ill-advised speeches to set him so at naught:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Reminding him of Siegfried, the Lady Kriemhild's lord;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Said he: " This ride to Hagen is therefore untoward."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen spake, of Tronj: " Through fear I'll not forego!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If such your will is, heroes, 'twere well to buckle to.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gladly will I ride with you, e'en unto Etzel's realm."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon by his hand were shatter'd full many a shield and helm.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The boats were ready waiting, and many a man was there:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate'er they had of clothing on board forthwith they bare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unwearyingly wrought they until the fall of eve;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And full of joy and gladness at length their homes they leave.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their tents and wooden cabins were pitch'd upon the green</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Along the further Rhine-bank. When finish'd this had been,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king's fair wife besought him a while there to abide</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For one night would she lay her his manly form beside.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With trumpeting and fluting the early morning brake.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To warn them to be starting: then did they ready make.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If any had a sweetheart her to his heart he laid;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For them a bitter parting King Etzel's wife soon made!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The sons of the fair Ute for vassal had a man</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As bold as he was faithful; now, when the march began,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He to the king, in secret, did thus his mind declare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Said he: " It needs must grieve me that to this feast ye fare."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This man by name was Rumold, a knight of ready hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"To whom," so spake he, " leave ye your people and your land?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alas, that none can turn you, ye warriors, from your mood!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This message of Kriemhilda's to me ne'er boded good."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"To thee my realm be trusted, and eke my little son,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Serve faithfully the ladies; so let my will be done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shouldst thou see any mourner, 'tis thine to cheer his life.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No harm will e'er befall us by cause of Etzel's wife."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The horses were awaiting the kings and eke their men;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With loving kiss departed full many a husband then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whose heart was full of courage, and body strong with life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon to be sadly wept for by many a comely wife.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Who saw the eager warriors unto their horses go.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Saw likewise many a lady there standing in her woe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they for long were parting too surely did they feel,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Foreboding great disaster. Heart never thus had weal.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now quickly the Burgundians did on their journey ride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was there much disturbance through all the country wide;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On either side the mountains both women wept and men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howe'er their people bare it forth fared they blithely then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors of Niblung to ride with them had come,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand men in hauberks, who left behind at home</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many a lovely lady, ne'er to be seen again.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Still wrought the wounds of Siegfried in Kriemhild bitter pain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their course they now directed. King Gunther's gallant men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Up through the East Franks' country, towards the River Main;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thither led them Hagen, who knew the road of old.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their marshal was Sir Dankwart, Burgundian hero bold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As they from Eastern Franks' land to Schwanefeld rode on,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Well might they be to all men by noble bearing known,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These princes and their kinsmen, heroes deserving fame.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king on the twelfth morning unto the Danube came.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen, knight of Tronje, rode of them all foremost;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Good heart and courage gave he unto the Niblung host.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warrior bold dismounted, down on the sand stood he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And hastily his warhorse made fast unto a tree.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The stream was overflowing, no skiff was there to see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The Nibelungs misdoubted, in great anxiety.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How they should e'er get over; the flood was all too wide.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gallant knights dismounted hard by the river-side.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Much damage," said Sir Hagen, "may here be done to thee,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ruler of the Rhineland! Look for thyself and see;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The river is o'erflowing, and mighty is its flood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>1 trow we lose ere nightfall here many a hero good."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"What art thou casting at me, Hagen? " the great king spake.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Seek not again to daunt us for thine own honour's sake.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The ford thou shalt find for us, which to that land doth cross.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That we both steeds and raiment may take there without loss."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"My life to me," quoth Hagen, " is not yet such a load</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I should wish to drown me in this wide, rushing flood!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For by my hands Fd sooner that many a man should die</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In Etzel's country yonder: good-will thereto have I.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Proud warriors and goodly, stay by the water then,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whilst I along the river myself seek ferrymen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who presently will take us across to Gelfrat's land."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then took the doughty Hagen his good shield in his hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>ell clad was he in armour; his shield he did thereon,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And on his head his helmet; brightly enow it shone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Above his harness wore he a sword so broad of blade</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That wounds right deep and ghastly with either edge it made.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then up and down the river he sought some ferryman;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He heard a splash of water; to hearken he began.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas made by elfin women within a fountain fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who fain to cool their bodies were bathing themselves there.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as Hagen saw them he slyly towards them crept.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No sooner had they seen him than off they swiftly leapt.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That thus they had escaped him did please them mightily;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He took their raiment from them, no further harm did he.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake one of the mermaids, Hadburga was she hight:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"O Hagen, noble warrior, we'll tell to thee aright,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How thou upon this journey unto the Huns shalt thrive,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If thou, bold thane, our raiment again to us wilt give."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They floated like to sea-birds before him on the flood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It seemed to him their foresight must needs be sure and good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever they should tell him he, therefore, would believe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To whatsoe'er he ask'd them, wise answers they would give.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Said she: " To Etzel's country ye certainly may take</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This ride; and I am ready my faith thereon to stake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ne'er did heroes journey to any kingdom yet—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In truth ye may believe it—who did such honour get."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This saying made Sir Hagen within his heart right gay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then gave he them their garments and made no more delay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When they their wondrous raiment forthwith had donn'd again,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The way to Etzel's country aright they did explain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the other mermaid, her name was Siegelind:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Thee, Hagen, son of Aldrian, to warn I have a mind.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>False was it what my sister to get her clothing said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For comest thou to Hunsland, thou'lt sorely be betray'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Ay! homeward shouldst thou turn thee; yet is there time to spare:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing that ye, bold heroes, have thus been bidden there,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That all of you may perish within King Etzel's land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whoe'er goes riding thither hath Death at his right hand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But Hagen spake in answer: " Ye fool me needlessly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What rhyme or reason is it that all of us should die</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Among the Hunfolk yonder, through hate of any man? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>More fully then their meaning to tell him they began.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And one of them spake further: " It must in sooth be so,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That none with life escapeth who to that land doth go.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Save only the king's chaplain; that can we surely tell;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He unto Gunther's kingdom will come back safe and well."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then, in grim mood, bold Hagen answer unto her made:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"'Twere hard to tell my masters what thou just now hast said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That yonder 'mid the Hunfolk we all must lose our lives.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Show us across the water, thou wisest of all wives! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: " Against this journey since thou wilt nothing hear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There yonder in a hostel, unto the river near,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A ferryman is dwelling—and none there is elsewhere."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then knowing what he wanted he would not tarry there.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But one of them call'd after the knight discomfited:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Nay, wait awhile. Sir Hagen, thou wilt too fast ahead!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hear better how we tell you to cross the sands aright;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warden of the marchland by name is Else hight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"He hath a brother also, Gelfrat the knight is he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A great lord in Bavaria. Not easy will it be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For you to pass his marches. Ye ought to well beware,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with the boatman also ye needs must deal with care.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"So grim is he of humour, he will not let you go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unless unto the hero some good intent ye show:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Would ye by him be ferried, give him the payment due.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This land he hath in keeping, and is to Gelfrat true.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And if he come not quickly shout to him o'er the flood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Say ' Amelrich ' your name is;— he was a hero good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who, by his foes' contrivance, was driven from this land—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whene'er his name is spoken the steersman is at hand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The haughty Hagen bow'd him before these womenfolk:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But listening in silence no word again he spoke.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then higher up the river he walk'd, along the sand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And there, across the water, he saw a hostel stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then lustily began he to call across the flood:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Now, steersman, fetch me over! " shouted the warrior good;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Of ruddy gold an armlet I'll give thee for reward.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The matter of my journey, I tell thee, presses hard."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The boatman was so wealthy to serve he would not brook.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherefore a fee but seldom from anyone he took;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His underlings were likewise of high and haughty mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So, still, alone stood Hagen on this side of the flood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then with such might he shouted that, lo, from shore to shore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The river rang: the hero of strength had such great store:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Now Amelrich come fetch ye, Lord Else's man am I,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who had to leave this country by force of enmity."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>High on his sword an armlet towards him did he hold—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All bright and shining was it, compact of ruddy gold—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he, therefore, might row him across to Gelfrat's land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then took the haughty boatman himself the oar in hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The ferryman was churlish and obstinate of will—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lust of great possession doth often end in ill—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He wished to earn from Hagen that band of gold so red:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But from the warrior's weapon grim death he got instead.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The ferryman pull'd stoutly unto the hitherside;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But when the man he found not, whose name he had heard cried,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was he wroth in earnest. At Hagen's face look'd he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thus unto the hero he spake right bitterly:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"It may be that thou bearest the name of Amelrich;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him of whom I mind me thou art in no wise like;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By father and by mother he brother was to me.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And as thou hast betray'd me, thou here canst bide! " said he.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Not I, by God Almighty! " thereon, did Hagen speak:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I am a stranger warrior, and help for others seek.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Take now in friendly fashion this wage I offer you</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To put me o'er the water; I am your friend right true."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The ferryman made answer: " Nay, that shall never be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My well-beloved masters have many an enemy;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore I row no strangers across unto their land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If life thou prizest, quickly step out upon the sand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now, do not so," quoth Hagen, " for sorry is my mood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But take from me in kindness this band of gold so good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand men and horses across the stream to row."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The boatman grim gave answer: "That will I never do."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A sturdy oar he lifted, mighty and broad of blade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And struck a blow at Hagen; an erring stroke he made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in the boat he stagger'd and on his knee fell down.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A ferryman so gruesome Hagen had never known.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And when the haughty stranger still more he would provoke,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A steering board he wielded, and into splinters broke</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>About the head of Hagen. A stalwart man was he;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whence came to Else's boatman much sorrow presently.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In anger fiercely raging, Hagen reach'd out his hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In haste to seize his scabbard, wherefrom he drew a brand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And smote his head from off him, and dash'd it to the ground.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Among the proud Burgundians the news flew quickly round.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But at the self-same moment when he the boatman slew.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The skiff stream-downwards drifted, which gave him cause to rue;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For ere in hand he brought it to weary he began.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then mighty was the rowing of royal Gunther's man.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With sturdy strokes the stranger turn'd it about again.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until within his hand-grasp the stout oar broke in twain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He would, to reach the warriors, a sandy beach have found:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And having not another, how quickly now he bound</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The splinters with his shield-strap! 'twas but a slender band.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Towards a coppice steering, he brought the boat to land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There on the bank-side standing he found his masters three,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And liegemen came to meet him,—a goodly company.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Him with kind welcome greeted these noble knights and good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But, when they look'd within it, the wherry reek'd with blood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That from the great wound spurted as he the boatman slew;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then from the warriors Hagen had questions not a few.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>No sooner had King Gunther seen the hot blood all red</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Within the vessel washing, than, straightway, thus he said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Come, why not tell me, Hagen, where is the boatman gone?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween your strength so mighty hath him of life fordone."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With lying words he answer'd: " As I the boat there found</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A desert heath alongside, my hand the rope unbound;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But never of a boatman have I to-day had sight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor here by fault on my part, hath any had despite."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then one of the Burgundians, the noble Gernot, said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"To-day I needs must sorrow for friends soon to be dead;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since we have found no boatman waiting for us at hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How are we to come over? For that in fear I stand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Right loudly then cried Hagen: " Lay down upon the green,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ye squires, the horses' trappings: I mind me I have been</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The best of all the rowers that on the Rhine were found.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll wager I can bring you across to Gelfrat's ground."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>That they might be the sooner ferried across the flood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They drave the horses in it; whose swimming was so good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, strong as was the current, they cross'd it none the less;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though some far downwards drifted in very weariness.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their gold and all their baggage unto the ship they bore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since from this journey's ending they now could turn no more.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Hagen was the captain; he ferried to the strand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many a gallant warrior into the unknown land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of noble knights a thousand first brought he to the shore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And after these his warriors, and ever there were more:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of men-at-arms nine thousand he ferried safe to land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor all day long did weary the gallant Tronian's hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When he the whole in safety across the flood had brought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warrior bold and eager of that strange story thought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which the wild water-maidens erewhile to him had said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then for King Gunther's chaplain the days were wellnigh sped!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Amidst the chapel baggage he sought and found the priest,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who on his hand was leaning, that on the Pyx did rest.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But little that avail'd him when Hagen him did spy:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The all-forsaken chaplain must suffer grievously.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Out of the skifl" he swung him, ere yet a moment pass'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though many voices shouted: " Stay him, good sirs, avast."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Young Giselher fell a- cursing in anger at the sight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet would not Hagen heed him, but did it in despite.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the noble Gernot, the lord of Burgundy:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"This chaplain's death, O Hagen, now what avails it thee?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had any other done it it would have pleased you ill.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For what default or reason sought'st thou the priest to kill."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As best he could he floated, and well escaped had he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had any dared to help him; but that was not to be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Because the mightful Hagen was of too angry mood:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He thrust him under water,—that seem'd to no one good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now when the wretched chaplain no help saw in his need,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Backward again he turn'd him; sore was his plight indeed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet though to swim he knew not, God helped him with His hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That safe and sound in body he got once more to land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There stood the hapless chaplain and shook his raiment out;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thereby well knew Hagen that now there was no doubt</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But true the tale was, told him by those wild water-wives.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thought he: " Then all these warriors perforce must lose their lives."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When that the three kings' lieges the ship had all unstored.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And unto land had carried whate'er they had on board,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hagen to pieces hew'd it and flung it in the flood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereover marvell'd greatly those warriors bold and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Why dost thou thus, O brother? " to him did Dankwart say;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"How shall we cross the water when on our homeward way,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We ride again from Hunsland unto the Rhine country?"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Look you," to him said Hagen, " that thing can never be! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the lord of Tronje: " This do I with the thought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, should we on this journey have any cravens brought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who fain would basely leave us, through cowardice of mind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They must a shameful ending here in this river find."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A man there was amongst them from Burgundy who came,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By might of hand a hero, and Volker was his name.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right cunningly he utter'd all that was in his mind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And whatsoe'er did Hagen this minstrel good did find.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The chargers now were ready, each packhorse had its load.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So far, the host no damage had suffered on the road</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To daunt them, or to trouble, except the chaplain's loss;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who needs must to the Rhineland on foot the country cross.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
