<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup><h2><span epub:type="label">Adventure</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span></h2><h3 epub:type="title">HOW SIEGFRIED WAS BETRAYED</h3></hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the fourth day morning came two and thirty men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the king's court riding; and word was carried then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Gunther, the most mighty, that he was call'd to war.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lie cost many a woman much grief and sorrow sore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When leave to them was granted, before the king they went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And said that they were under King Lud'ger's government,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who vanquish'd was aforetime by doughty Siegfried's hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And brought by him a captive unto King Gunther's land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then greeted he the heralds, and bade them seated be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But one among them pray'd him: " Sire, let us stand, till we</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Our message have deliver'd and errand duly done:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Know then that thou art hated by many a mother's son!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"King Ludegast and Lud'ger, do challenge you to war,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of whom you were aforetime the bloody conqueror:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They're coming with their armies, to ride thy country through."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At this the king feign'd anger, as if to him 'twere new.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They took these counterfeiters to hostel presently.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How then could Siegfried ware be of any treachery,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Could he or any other suspect they played a part?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto themselves hereafter befell the pain and smart.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king with his advisers were whispering without cease;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor would Hagen of Tronje e'er let him be at peace.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though many a lord would gladly have given up the plot,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet Hagen from his counsel would never swerve a jot.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One day it chanced that Siegfried came on this scheming band;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And straight began to ask them the Lord of Netherland:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Why goes the king so sadly, thus brooding with his men?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hath any done him mischief, I'll help avenge it then."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then up and spake King Gunther: " Cause have I sad to be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For Ludegast and Lud'ger have straightly challenged me:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The eyes of all shall see them here riding in my land."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then cried the gallant hero: " Right soon shall Siegfried's hand,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"As doth beseem your honour, this business undertake</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To break these warriors' power, as it erewhile I brake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their strongholds shall be ruin'd, their land be ravaged,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere I with them have ended: thereon I stake my head!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>You may with all your warriors at home stay quietly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And let me ride to battle with those who came with me.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That willingly I serve you, you very soon shall know:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your foes by me shall suffer as ne'er before, I trow."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"This is to me good hearing," the king in answer said,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As if he were in earnest well-pleased to have his aid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the knight low bow'd he,—the false and faithless knave!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ther said the noble Siegfried: " No care you need to have! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With their esquires and liegemen they plann'd the journey then:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas done for the deceiving of Siegfried and his men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He bade them all be ready, his men of Netherland:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And soon had Siegfried's warriors their fighting gear at hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the gallant Siegfried: " My father Siegmund, pray</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Remain thou here behind us; we shall not long delay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If so be that God speed us, we'll come back to the Rhine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So with the king abiding shall happy days be thine! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The banner they unfurled, as though they fain would start.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Gunther's liegemen present there were a goodly part</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who naught knew of the message, nor what it all did mean:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A mighty throng of people round Siegfried there was seen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their helmets and their breastplates on horses they did stow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a stout knight hastened to leave the land and go.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then went Hagen of Tronj to where Kriemhild did stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And prayed for leave of absence, since they would quit the land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Thrice happy I," cried Kriemhild, " that I have got for lord</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One who to my dear kinsmen such succour can accord,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As doth my dear lord Siegfried unto my kindred here.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore," the queen said, " will I be now of right good cheer.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"But you, my good friend Hagen, one thing remember still;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I would gladly serve you, nor e'er have done you ill;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this you can requite me to my dear lord one day:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If I've done aught to Brunhild for that he must not pay!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"For since then I have rued it," the noble lady said;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"He therefore hath my body most sorely punished.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If I did ever utter aught to enrage her mood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right well hath he avenged her, the hero bold and good."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"You yet shall be forgiven, in days to come," quoth he;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Kriemhilda, my dear lady, now must you tell to me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How through your husband Siegfried to serve you I may try;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll gladly do it, lady; to none more willingly."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I should have no misgivings," replied the noble wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Lest any one in battle should jeopardize his life;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If he were not so reckless and over-rash of mood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He aye might be in safety, my gallant thane and good."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon said Hagen, " Lady, if you have any fear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest any one should wound him, 'twere best to let me hear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The arts that I must practise if any ill betide;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For I will ever guard him, whether I walk or ride."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake: " Thou art my kinsman, as I, in sooth, am thine;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore to thee I'll trust him, this darling love of mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That thou mayst guard him for me,—this husband of my own."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then told she him the story 'twere well he had not known.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake: " Bold is my husband and strong enough thereto.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he upon the mountain erstwhile the dragon slew,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In the brute's blood he bathed him, the goodly warrior.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And since that day, in battle, no steel can cut him more.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Yet, no less am I anxious when he in fight doth stand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And javelins fly around him from many a hero's hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest by mischance I lose him, and mourn my husband dear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alas, what sorrow have I for Siegfried's sake to bear!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I'll tell it as a favour, my dearest friend, to thee,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In faith that thou maintainest the pledge thou gav'st to me,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where, only, may be wounded this husband dear of mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll let thee hear, confiding unto no ear but thine.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"When from the dragon's death-wounds came pouring the hot blood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And therein he was bathing himself, the warrior good,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There fell between his shoulders a large-sized linden-leaf:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On that spot one may wound him; 'tis this doth cause my grief."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake Hagen of Tronje: " Upon his garment sew</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A little token for me, that I the spot may know</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where I have got to shield him, when we stand in the strife."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She thought to save the hero: by this he lost his life.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake: " With fine silk will I upon his garment sew</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A little cross unnoticed, that so thy hand may know,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>O hero, where to guard him, when into fight he goes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in the stress of battle he stands before his foes."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"That will I do," quoth Hagen, " my lady dear." Whereon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lady thought some vantage she for her lord had won:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And yet Kriemhilda's husband was by this means betray'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His leave then took Sir Hagen, and went away right glad.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king's men and retainers were all of cheerful mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And yet, I ween, no warrior within his breast e'er could</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hide heart so false and perjured, as he in his did hide</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon whose faith and promise Kriemhild the queen relied.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the next day morning with his own thousand men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rode forth the gallant Siegfried: and joyful was he then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He thought he would take vengeance for his friend's injury.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him rode Hagen closely that he his coat might eye.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When he espied the token, two of his following</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He sent away in secret another tale to bring:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How peace should not be broken towards King Gunther's land,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They had but come as envoys by Ludeger's command.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>How loth turn'd Siegfried homewards; he rode unwillingly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sad that his friend's annoyance thus unavenged should be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hardly could Gunther's warriors bring him to turn his ranks.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the king straight rode he: his host began his thanks.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now God reward thy goodwill, my noble friend Siegfried!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That thou didst go so gladly to help me in my need,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I aye shall be thy debtor, as I of right should be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beyond all friends and kinsmen I build my faith on thee.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now that this expedition will trouble us no more,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I fain would go a-hunting the wild bear and the boar</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At VVaskenwalde, yonder, as I so oft have done."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This was the plan of Hagen, the false and faithless one.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"To all guests in my palace due notice shall there be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I will ride forth early: those who would hunt with me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must hold themselves all ready; those who would rather stay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To loiter with the ladies have my good leave alway."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the stalwart Siegfried, with noble courtliness:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"If you will ride a-hunting, Til gladly do no less.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A huntsman you must lend me, and sundry hounds also,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then gladly to the forest along with you I'll go."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And dost thou want one only? " the king said thereupon,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I'll lend thee, if it please thee, four men to whom are known</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The forest and the coverts the quarry most frequent;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So that the tryst in seeking thy time be not misspent."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Home to his wife then rode he, the goodly warrior bold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And quickly faithless Hagen unto the king had told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How he could get the vantage of the brave thane: 'twere shame</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such treason foul should ever disgrace a noble name.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
