<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure VIII— HOW SIEGFRIED WENT TO FETCH THE NIBELUNGS</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So thence went Siegfried unto the haven on the strand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Clad in his hood of darkness, to where a boat did stand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therein he stood, all hidden, this son of Siegmund brave;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He steered it quickly seaward, as 'twere the wind that drave.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Though no one saw the steersman, fast sped the bark along,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Urged by the strength of Siegfried,—in sooth his arms were strong.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Men thought that she was driven by some strange, mighty wind:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No, it was Siegfried drave her, the son of fair Sieglind.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When he a day had voyaged, and likewise through a night,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He came unto a country, by dint of main and might;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From one end to the other a hundred leagues or more,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The Niblung land, where kept he the mighty hoard in store.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then, all alone, the hero steered to an eyot broad,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And ran his skiff alongshore and left her safely moor'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then climbed he to a mountain, on which a castle stood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, like a wayworn traveller, for shelter sought and food.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So came he to the gateway, which, locked, before him stood,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They guarded well their honour, as folk at this day would.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then straight he fell a-knocking, like any man unknown.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gate was kept well guarded: he saw within it soon</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A monstrous giant warder, who sentinel did stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And kept at all times ready his weapons close at hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He called: " Who cometh knocking so loudly at the door? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thenanswer'dthebold Siegfried—but changed his voice therefore—</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And said: " I am a warrior; undo me now the gate,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere I arouse to anger some one, though it be late,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who rather would sleep softly and in his chamber bide.'</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It anger'd the gate-keeper that Siegfried thus replied.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon had the doughty giant girded his armour on,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Set on his head his hehiiet, and quickly seized upon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And swung aloft his buckler, and opened wide the gate:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How straightly then on Siegfried he rush'd, with scowl of hate!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" How had he dared awaken so many a gallant man? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And straight upon the question his hand to smite began.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble guest prepared him a bold defence to make,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But, at the porter's onset, his very shield-clasps brake,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Smashed by a bar of iron; the knight was sore distrest.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And somewhat was he fearful that death would end his quest,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing the huge gate-keeper did smite so sturdily;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which yet his master Siegfried was not ill-pleased to see.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So mighty was their combat that all the castle rang.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Throughout the halls of Niblung men heard the crash and clang.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At last he threw the giant, and bound him foot and hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The tidings soon spread over the whole of Niblung-land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The noise of fierce strife sounded deep through the mountain side.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where Alberich the bold one—a wild dwarf—did abide:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With speed he seized his weapons, and ran to where he found</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This brave and noble stranger, as he the giant bound.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A fierce wight was this Albrich, of strength he had good store;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A helmet and a hauberk he on his body wore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A weighty whip, gold-handled, he carried in his hand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all his swiftness ran he to where Siegfried did stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Seven knots, both hard and heavy, hung down in front of it,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With which the bold man's buckler so ruthlessly he hit,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As in his hand he held it,—that it in pieces fell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was the goodly stranger in fear for life as well.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The shield, that now was broken, he from his hand did throw,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thrust into its scabbard his sword,—'twas long enow.—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His treasurer he would not, an he could help it, slay:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His breeding he forgat not, as was his righteous way.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With his strong hands for weapons at Alberich he ran,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And by the beard he gripp'd him, that old and grizzly man!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So ruthlessly he pull'd it, that loud the old man cried:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The grip of the young hero could Albrich ill abide.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Loud was the bold dwarf's outcry: " I prithee now, have done;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>An I could be the hegeman of any knight, save one</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To whom I have sworn fealty to be his vassal aye,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rather than die, I'd serve thee! " the crafty one did say.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But Alberich was bound as the giant had been bound,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And by the strength of Siegfried much pain and trouble found.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The dwarf began to question: " How are you call'd? " quoth he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He said: " My name is Siegfried: I should be known to thee!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" That is a goodly hearing!" said Alberich the dwarf.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Now know I of a surety what metal you are of.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And know you have good reason to lord it in the land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If you my life will leave me, I'll do what you command."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus spake the hero Siegfried: " Then must thou straightway go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bring me of the warriors the best we have, I trow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Nibelungs a thousand I fain would here behold."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But wherefore these he wanted that was to no man told.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of Albrich and the giant the fetters he unbound.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Alberich ran quickly to where the knights he found.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The Nibelungs he wakened from sleep right cautiously,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And said: " Up now, ye heroes! to Siegfried hasten ye! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then sprang they from their couches all ready at his call,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand active warriors equipp'd stood in the hall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So went they unto Siegfried, who by himself did stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And fairly did he greet them,—some knelt to kiss his hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They lit full many a taper, pure wine for him they pour'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He thank'd them all for coming so promptly at his word.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake he: "Ye must yonder with me across the flood! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this he found them ready, those heroes bold and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Full thirty hundred warriors had come at his behest:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From out their numbers took he a thousand of the best.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To these were brought their helmets, and all their gear to hand,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Because he fain would lead them unto Brunhilda's land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " Ye good knights, hearken to that which now I say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your raiment should at court be exceeding rich and gay,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For many a lovely woman will look on us, I trow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So make your bodies handsome with good clothes ere we go."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All on a morning early the bold knights rode away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What gallant comrades Siegfried had got himself that day!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They all had good war-horses, and garments rich and grand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With knightly mien and bearing they came to Brunhild's land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the turrets standing was many a winsome maid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the queen: " Doth any know who be these," she said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Whom I see sailing hither from o'er the sea so far?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their sails be richly woven,—whiter than snow they are."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And the Rhine-king made answer: " My warriors are they,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom I did on the journey bid near at hand to stay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I sent to fetch them, lady, and here they come, I see."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereon the noble strangers were eyed all wond'ringly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For plainly saw they Siegfried upon the foredeck stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Arrayed in costly raiment, with all his warrior-band.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the queen: "Now must you, my Lord King, counsel me:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shall these new guests be welcomed? or shall I let them be? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " Without the palace to meet them you should go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As if we saw them gladly, that they may take it so."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the queen according unto the king's behest;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though, in her greeting, Siegfried she sever'd from the rest.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A lodging was found for them, their goods were put in store.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now so many strangers had landed on that shore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That great the throng of folk was, whichever way one went.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The knights on sailing homewards to Burgundy were bent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the Queen Brunhilda: " Right thankful should I be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him who could my silver and gold divide for me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Between my guests and Gunther's; an ample store I have,"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Dankwart said:—the liegeman of Giselher the brave—</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Most noble Queen and Lady, let me now have the key.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow I can divide it: if shame should fall on me,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So let it be mine only." Thus spake the doughty thane.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he a gentle knight was, was from his bearing plain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as Hagen's brother the key had at command,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So many gifts and costly dispensed the hero's hand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To those who one mark needed, such bounty did he give,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That all the poorest, henceforth, in comfort well might live.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Pound pieces by the hundred he, without reckoning, gave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In clothing rich, full many that royal hall did leave</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who ne'er such splendid raiment before that time had worn.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This vexed the queen right sorely, it was not to be borne!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake, in her vexation: " Sir King, it seems to me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This chamberlain of yours is with all my goods so free</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He soon will leave me nothing: he throws my gold away!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I shall be aye beholden to him who this can stay.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Such rich gifts doth he lavish, the thane must sure believe</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I've sent for Death to take me: but I would longer live!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate'er my father left me I trow I well can spend."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On such a spendthrift treasurer did never queen depend! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen spake of Tronje: " Fair lady, have no fear 1</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king of the Rhine river hath gold enough, and gear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To lavish just as freely; and well may we forego</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To take Brunhilda's treasure when hence we homeward go."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Nay, for mine own sake, hear me," the queen said, " for I will</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Take with me twenty coffers, which I with gold will fill</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And silken stuffs, which also I'll give with mine own hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When we come over yonder unto King Gunther's land."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With precious stones and jewels they did her coffers lade;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her own lords of the chamber to help therewith she bade:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For she would put no trust in the men of Giselher.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gunther, therefore, and Hagen began to laugh at her.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the Queen Brunhilda: " To whom leave I my land?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That first must be determined by thine and mine own hand."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble king made answer: " Let him forthwith appear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who best thereto would please you, we'll leave him steward here. "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One of her noblest kinsmen the lady to her bade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(It was her mother's brother) to him the maiden said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" To you be now entrusted my castles and the land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until they come directly under King Gunther's hand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did she of her people choose twenty hundred men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who with her to the Rhineland must make the voyage then,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beside the thousand warriors who came from Niblung land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then all to start made ready: they rode down to the strand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of women six and eighty along with her she took,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke a hundred maidens, who comely were in look.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then they delay'd no longer,—they wearied to be gone;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But those they left behind them, these wept, ay, many a one!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With seemly grace the lady fared from her fatherland;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She kissed her nearest kinsmen, who stood on either hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With kindliest leave-takings they came unto the shore;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To her forefathers' country the lady came no more!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One heard of games of all kinds to pass the time away</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And make the journey shorter: a hundred pastimes gay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They had, too, for their voyage a right good sailing wind.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With merriment and laughter they left their land behind.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Not once upon the journey did she embrace her lord:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until they reached his palace their pleasure was defer'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At Worms they, in the castle, their wedding feast would hold;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where they, ere long, with gladness came with their heroes bold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
