<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure VII.— HOW GUNTHER WON BRUNHILDA</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now, while all this was passing, their ship had neared unto</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The castle walls, so closely that the king's eyes could view</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Above them, at the windows, full many a winsome maid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he knew none amongst them made Gunther passing sad.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then questioned he Sir Siegfried, his brave companion:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Of all those lovely maidens, dost thou in truth know none,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who now are gazing downward at us upon the flood?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whoe'er their lord and master, they be of noble blood."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To him replied Sir Siegfried: " Now look you, secretly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Amidst the maids there standing, and then confess to me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which you would take among them, if you thereto had might."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That will I do!" cried Gunther, the bold and valiant knight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Yonder, within that window, I see one of them stand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All in a snow-white garment; she's fairest of the band!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Tis her mine eyes have chosen, so fair she is to see:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had I the power to wed her, my wife she needs must be."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The judgment of thine eyesight hath done for thee right well!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That is the noble Brunhild, the maiden beautiful,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom all thine heart desireth, thy senses, and thy mood."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In all ways did her bearing seem to King Gunther good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The queen her beauteous maidens did thereupon command</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To leave the windows straightway: they ought not there to stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A gazing-stock for strangers! they readily obey'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And what the ladies next did hath since to us been said:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They decked themselves for sake of the visitors unknown,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As comely women ever since days of old have done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the narrow windows they quickly came again,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whence they could see the heroes,—and gazed with might and</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There were of them four only, who came unto the land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bold Siegfried now was leading a horse along the sand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The comely dames beheld him, across the window shelf:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whilst Gunther thought with pride that they gazed upon himself.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He held it by the bridle,—the shapely animal,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It was so sleek and handsome, so big and strong withal,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the king had mounted, and in the saddle sat.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus Siegfried did him service; which he erelong forgat.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Siegfried fetched his own steed, which in the ship did stay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such service had he rendered but seldom till that day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To stand at a man's stirrup, until he was astride!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fair and noble ladies this from their lattice spied.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>These two high-mettled heroes—to one ensample clad—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>White chargers and white raiment like snow new-fallen had,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Each matching with the other; their solid bucklers bright</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shone, on the left hand hanging of either goodly knight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Bejeweird were their saddles, their saddle-bows were small j</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So rode they in their glory, before Brunhilda's hall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The bells upon their harness were wrought of bright red gold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They came unto that country as bound on venture bold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With spear-heads newly sharpened, with swords well-wrought and keen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which hung down to the rowels of these two goodly men;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such weapons bore the bold ones, with broad and sharp-edged blade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas all marked by Brunhilda, the great and noble maid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With them came also Dankwart, and Hagen of Tronj.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These warriors were apparell'd, as ancient legends say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alike, in costly raiment and raven-black of hue;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fair were their shields and mighty, and strong and broad thereto.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The jewels that adorned them from India's land were brought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And glittered on their garments, as these the sunshine caught.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their little vessel left they unguarded, on the flood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So rode they to the castle, these heroes brave and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Full six-and-eighty turrets they saw within the wall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Three palaces far-stretching, and one fair, well-built hall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Compact of precious marble, as meadow-grass all green;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And here, amid her court-folk, awaited them the queen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The castle gate unlocked was, the doors were open thrown,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brunhilda's liegemen hasted to meet these guests unknown,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To welcome these newcomers unto their lady's land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They bade men take their horses and bucklers from their hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A chamberlain said to them: " Yield now your swords to us,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke your shining hauberks." " Nay, it shall not be thus! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Cried Hagen, lord of Tronjd, " These we ourselves will bear! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Siegfried had to teach him what were the customs there.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The fashion in this castle, as you must understand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Is that no guest shall carry a weapon in his hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So let them hence be taken: in sooth, 'tis fairly meant."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen, Gunther's liegeman, did grudgingly consent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wine for the guests was order'd, and lodgings good prepared.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And to and from the palace swift-footed warriors fared,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All clad in princely raiment they ever came and went;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And on the stranger-heroes were wond'ring glances bent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then unto Queen Brunhilda some one the news declared,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That certain unknown warriors had suddenly appear'd,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In glorious apparel, by ship across the flood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereon began to question the maiden fair and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I would that someone told me," so spake the maiden queen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who are these stranger-warriors, that ne'er afore were seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now stand in my castle, with such a noble grace?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And for whose sake these heroes have voyaged to this place? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake one of her people: " Lady, I must avow</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not one of these same warriors I e'er beheld till now;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But there is one among them much like unto Siegfried:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You must give him good welcome, that is in sooth my rede.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The other his companion, who is so praiseworthy,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If he the power had, either some rich king he might be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or have the jurisdiction o'er some wide princely lands:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One sees beside the others how royally he stands.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The third of these companions he is of aspect grim.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet, mighty Queen, right comely he seems, and fair of limb;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From those his rapid glances that he around him throws.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His mien, if I mistake not, a gruesome temper shows.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The youngest knight among them seems worthy of all praise;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As gentle as a maiden, yet knightly are his ways.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How winsomely he stands there, with what a high-born mien!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And yet, if he were thwarted, we'd rue the hour, I ween.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>•• How blithe soe'er his bearing, and beautiful his form.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There's many a goodly woman—an' he began to storm—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he could bring to weeping; his body fashion'd is</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To excel in manly virtues,—a brave, bold thane is this!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the queen: "Nowbringme my raiment and my gear;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And if the mighty Siegfried to win my love is here.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And therefore to this land comes,—'tis like to cost his life!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In sooth, I do not fear him enough to be his wife."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ere long, the fair Brunhilda was fittingly array'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With her there came full many a beauteous serving-maid,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A hundred, perhaps, or over,—attired in all their best.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These comely dames were eager to see the stranger-guest.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With these there went, in order, the thanes of Isenland,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors of Brunhilda, each with his sword in hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Five hundred men, or over; whereat their hearts misgave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then from their seats uprose they, the heroes bold and brave.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When first the Queen Brunhilda perceived the knight Siegfried,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ye would, perchance, be told of the words the maiden said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Be welcome," quoth she, " Siegfried, here unto this our land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What meaning hath your journey I fain would understand?"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I proffer, dame Brunhilda, my hearty thankfulness,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you have deigned to greet me, most generous princess,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before this noble warrior, who stands beside me now;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing that he my lord is, such grace I disavow!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"By birth he is of Rhineland; and what shall I say more?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His love for thee 'tis only that brings us to this shore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My lord doth seek to wed thee, whatever may befall;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of this, in time, bethink thee: he will not change at all.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The name he bears is Gunther, he is a mighty king.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If haply he may win thee, he asks no other thing.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas this good warrior bade me upon this journey come:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>An' I had dared deny him, I'd fain have stay'd at home."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake: " Since he's thy master, and thou his vassal art,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll stake a venture with him, if he dare play his part,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And if he gain the mast'ry, then will I be his wife;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But should I be the winner, ye all do risk your life."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen spake, of Tronje: " O lady, let us see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This mighty game you play at; before a victory</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You score off my lord Gunther, it will go hard enow!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For such a beauteous maiden he'll count to win, I trow/'</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The stone he must throw boldly, then leap to where it lies;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then hurl the javelin with me: so be ye not unwise!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who knows? each may be losing his honour and his head!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You must bethink you therefore," the winsome fair one said.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On this, the gallant Siegfried unto King Gunther went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bade him tell the princess his purpose and intent;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He might be for the issue without anxiety:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I shall be there to shield you with all my craft," quoth he.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the royal Gunther: " Most high and mighty queen!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Declare your task unto me; and had it harder been,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For sake of your fair body I everything would stake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My very head I'd venture you for my wife to take."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as Queen Brunhilda his will and meaning knew,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She bade the games be hastened, as seemed to her but due.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And ordered them to bring her her wonted gear for fight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A ruddy golden breastplate, and buckler round and bright.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A silken fighting-doublet drew over all the maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such as, in closest combat, would turn the sharpest blade;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Lybian stuff 'twas woven, and it was deftly done;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A bright embroider'd trimming upon the border shone.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meantime the stranger-warriors were eyed somewhat askance,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Dankwart and Sir Hagen ill brooked this arrogance.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And how the king would fare, too, did weigh upon their mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They thought: " unto us warriors our journey bodes no good."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The while these things were doing, Siegfried, the crafty one,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had, unperceived of any, back to the vessel gone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And found his hood of darkness, where hidden it had lain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And swiftly slipped it on him: thus he became unseen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then back again he hastened to where the queen he found</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her fateful game arranging, with many knights around.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Invisibly he joined them: so cunningly 'twas done</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, midst the whole assembly, he was discerned by none.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The ring was marked out clearly wherein the games should be;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In presence of bold warriors, who came the sport to see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seven hundred men and over one saw, who weapons bare:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which of the two was winner the heroes must declare.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ere long appeared Brunhilda in all her warlike gear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As if she meant to conquer all kingdoms far and near.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Above her silken vestment was twisted golden twine:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw thereunder ever her lovely colour shine.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And then came her attendants; who in their hands did hold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A mighty round-rimmed buckler, all wrought of ruddy gold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With steel-like clasps upon it, many, and broad, and bright;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And underneath its shelter the lovely maid would fight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The maiden's shield-sustainer a noble baldrick was,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherein were gems embroidered, as green as e'er was grass;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their ever-changing brightness was mirror'd in the gold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He who would win such lady must needs be warrior bold!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Her shield beneath the bosses, as we have heard declare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was three good spans in thickness; and this the maid could bear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With steel and gold inlayings so richly 'twas beset,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her chamberlains—four of them—could scarcely carry it.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When now the sturdy Hagen beheld this shield brought in,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The wrathful Lord of Tronje did thus to speak begin:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"How now. King Gunther? truly we're like to lose our life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She, whom you would be wooing, must be the devil's wife! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hear more now of her raiment: she had a wondrous store,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A warrior's silken mantle from Azagaug she wore,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A noble, costly garment; from which the flash was seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of many a splendid jewel pertaining to the queen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then bore they to the lady,—and weighty 'twas, I trow,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A giant-spear well sharpened, which she was wont to throw;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Most strong and monstrous was it, and mighty too, and broad,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with its keen twin-edges right terribly it gored.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of that spear's weight, now hearken and hear the wonderment:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Four and a half good measures of metal to it went.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Three of Brunhilda's liegemen could scarce uphold its weight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When noble Gunther saw it, his courage did abate</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And in his heart he pondered: " What e'er will be the end?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If she be a hell-devil, who can the matter mend?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were I alive and safely once more in Burgundy,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Here, rid of love and wooing, she long might wait for me! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then outspake Hagen's brother, the valiant Dankwart,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Alack that we did ever on this state-journey start!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But knights we still are, surely, and it were very shame</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To perish in this country, o'ermastered by a dame.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I do regret right sorely that e'er I saw this land!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had but my brother Hagen his weapon in his hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I had mine! methinketh they'd be a whit more mild,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all their pride and boasting, these vassals of Brunhild.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"For, know now of a surety, each one of you I warn,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No oath of peace should bind me,—had I a thousand sworn.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere I fordone before me my master dear shall see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This maid her life shall forfeit, how ever fair she be! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"We, without let or hindrance, could surely leave this land,"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Said Hagen, Dankwart's brother, " had we good swords in hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke the armour on us that we in battle need;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then would this haughty woman soon change her tone indeed!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Full well the noble maiden heard what the warrior said;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With smiling mouth, half-turning, she o'er her shoulder bade:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Thinks he himself so valiant? bring them their armour then,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And let these heroes handle their keen-edged swords again."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they received their weapons, at the proud maid's command,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For joy did Dankwart redden to hold his sword in hand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Now play your games, and welcome!" shouted thefearless thane,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gunther need fear no danger, we have our swords again! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The strength of Queen Brunhilda it was a fearsome thing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They brought her for the contest a stone into the ring—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A monstrous one and heavy, so mighty, and so round,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Twelve stalwart heroes scarcely could heave it from the ground.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whene'er she threw the javelin she next would hurl this stone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the stout Burgundians within their spirit groan:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"God help us! " cried Sir Hagen, " what bride our king hath woo'd!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hell were her proper sojourn, she's of the Devil's brood! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Around her snow-white arms she began her sleeves to wind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And on her hand she fastened the buckler to her mind;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then high she poised her javelin; and so began the fight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gunther, and Siegfried likewise, did dread Brunhilda's spite.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And were it not for Siegfried, who came unto his aid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king's life had been forfeit unto the doughty maid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The knight, unseen, approach'd him, and twitch'd him by the hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Gunther quail'd: his cunning he did not understand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"What was it that did touch me? " the bold man thought, and he</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Look'd round and sought on all sides, but not a soul could see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A voice said: " It is Siegfried, 'tis I, your trusty friend,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As to this queen, I pray you, let fear be at an end."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He said: " Unhand the buckler, and let me carry it,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And what thou hear'st me tell thee, mark well with all thy wit:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thine must be all the gestures, but I will do each deed."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When Gunther understood him his heart grew light indeed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"See thou conceal my cunning, and tell no man thereof:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The queen will little glory win from thee, though she scoff,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And though it be her purpose to add unto her fame:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>See how she stands before thee, fearless, the noble dame! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With all her strength of body, her spear the glorious maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Against a new shield hurled,—'twas broad and stoutly made,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which on his arm was bearing the son of Siegelind;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bright fire-sparks from the steel flew, as driven by the wind.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The blade of her stout lance-head clean through his shield did crash,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And from his close-ring'd hauberk the fire was seen to flash.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The shock of the encounter so drave the stalwart men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, saving for the Tarnhelm, they both had there been slain</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Out of the mouth of Siegfried, the bold knight, gushed the blood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But soon again upsprang he: then gripped the hero good</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The spear which she had hurled, that thro' his buckler went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And back it flew upon her, by Siegfried's strong hand sent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He thought: " I will not shoot her, this maid who is so fair! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so he turned behind him the sharp head of the spear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with the shaft he smote her upon her vest of steel;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So that the blow re-echoed that his stout hand did deal</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The fire broke from her armour, as driven by the wind;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hard were the spear-thrusts dealt by the son of Siegelind!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So much King Gunther never had done with his own hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all her strength, the maiden such blows could not withstand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The beauteous Brunhilda, how soon she up did bound!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I thank thee, noble Gunther, thy shot its mark hath found! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She thought that he had done it by his own strength alone;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But no, there slipt behind him a far more mighty one.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Away she sped full swiftly, and wrathful was her mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The stone aloft she lifted—this noble maid and good—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then from her hand she hurled it with all her might and main,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And after it she leapt while her armour rang again.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thestone fell twelve good arms' lengths beyond her standing-place;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But further yet the maid sprang, and cleared the stone a pace.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then came the noble Siegfried to where the stone did lie:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas Gunther that did lift it, 'twas Siegfried let it fly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So bold a man was Siegfried, so mighty and so tall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He threw the stone still further, and leapt beyond its fall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His subtle arts had given such wondrous power of limb.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, in the leap. King Gunther, he bore along with him.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus was the leaping over, and hurling of the stone;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And they who looked saw no one, save Gunther there alone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The beauteous Brunhilda all red with wrath became:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For Siegfried had prevented King Gunther's death and shame.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Unto her court-folk turning, she loudly spake, as she,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Across the ring, the hero all safe and sound did see:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Come hither, quick, my kinsmen, and my good lieges all,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ye must now to King Gunther be underlings and thrall! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then laid these stalwart warriors their weapons from their hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At Gunther's feet, the rich king from the Burgundian land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then bent to do him homage full many a dauntless knight;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They thought that he the contest had won by his own might.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He gave her gentle greeting, for he was courtly bred.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then by the hand she took him, that famous maid, and said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She would henceforth allow him the rule and power to hold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right glad thereat was Hagen, the warrior brave and bold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She bade the noble hero along with her to go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Into the wide-room'd palace; which being done also,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>More fittingly was service paid to the noble knight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dankwart and Hagen glad were to see such pleasant sight</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile, the ready Siegfried wisely his plans did lay:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He took the hood of darkness and hid it safe away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then the great hall he entered, where many ladies sat,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And fell to question Gunther, and artfully did that:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Wherefore, my lord, delay you? when doth the game begin</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At which the queen so often hath challenged you to win?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let us behold and quickly in what wise it is done! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As though he knew naught of it behaved the crafty one.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"How can it e'er have happened," thereon inquired the queen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That you, most noble Siegfried, naught of the game have seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherein I have been worsted by mighty Gunther's hand? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then answered her Sir Hagen of the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " Yourself, O lady, did much disturb our mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So to the ship departed Siegfried, the hero good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What time our lord of Rhineland did win the game from you:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore he knows naught of it," said Gunther's liegeman true.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now welcome are these tidings," quoth warrior Siegfried,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That thus your pride hath fallen doth please me well, indeed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That some one there is living who may your master be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now must you, noble maiden, go with us o'er the sea."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the noble fair one: " This may not yet befall:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My kinsmen first must hear it, and my good liegemen all;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I may not thus so lightly desert my land, I trow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My chief friends must be sent there, ere I myself shall go."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then sent she heralds riding here, there and everywhere,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bid her friends and kinsmen, and lieges all repair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Isenstein the fortress, nor would she take excuse;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bade that costly raiment be given for their use.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So daily came they riding, from early hours till late</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto Brunhilda's castle, like to an army great.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Now, by my faith! " cried Hagen, " see now what we have done '.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With fair Brunhilda's liegemen we'll trouble have anon.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"While thus in power and numbers they throng throughout the land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What is the queen's intention we cannot understand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What if she be against us so wroth that we be lost?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble maiden surely was born to our great cost! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the sturdy Siegfried: " All this will I forestall;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The danger you are dreading I will not let befall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I must go hence, and succour bring quickly to this shore,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A band of chosen warriors ne'er known to you before.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Ye must not seek to find me, I go across the sea;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>May God meanwhile preserve you from all indignity!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll come back quickly, bringing a thousand men with me,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The very best of warriors that ever one could see."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Be not too long gone from us," the king in answer said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"In this our need we shall be right glad to have your aid."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Said he: " I'll come back to you, ere many days be spent;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And you must tell the queen that by you I have been sent."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
