<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 30</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-30" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXXI.— HOW THEY WENT TO CHURCH</h2>
			<p>
				<span><span>" So cold I feel my armour: " quoth Volker presently,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Methinks the night is wearing and soon will ended be;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I mark that by the breezes; 'twill very soon be day."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then many a man awoke they who still in slumber lay.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The morning light broke over the guests within the hall.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Hagen began on all sides the warriors to call,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To know if to the Minster to matins they would fare.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Meanwhile, in Christian fashion, the bells were chiming clear.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>So diverse was the chanting, thereby 'twas plain to see</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That Christians and heathens were not in unity.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And yet the men of Gunther to church would go withal;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They from their beds together had risen one and all.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The warriors then array'd them in clothes so finely wrought,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That better raiment never by heroes had been brought</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To any king's dominions. Ill did it Hagen please.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Said he: " Now should ye, heroes, don other suits than these.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Enough about the matter ye surely understand;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ye should, instead of roses, bear weapons in the hand.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For caps beset with jewels take shining helms and good;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Since we are well-advised of wicked Kriemhild's mood.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" This day must we do battle, I will to you declare;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Instead of silken doublets, ye should your hauberks wear,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And in the place of mantles take bucklers good and wide—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That if they seek a quarrel, the brunt ye may abide.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" My well-beloved masters, your friends and kinsmen too,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Go now unto the Minster,—that should ye gladly do—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And pray to God Almighty in your distress and need:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For know now, of a surety, that Death is nigh indeed.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" See, too, that ye forget not aught ill that ye have done.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And with true zeal and duty stand ye before God's throne.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of this, right noble warriors, I warn ye well afore,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Save God in Heaven may grant it, ye'll hear no masses more."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>They went unto the Minster, the princes with their men.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But in the hallow'd precincts bold Hagen spake again</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And bade them halt, lest any should leave the company:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" None knoweth what the Hunfolk to us may do," said he;</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" My friends, set down your bucklers upright before your feet,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And answer ye to any who may unkindly greet</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With deep and deadly sword-stroke. Hark ye, to Hagen's rede,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So will ye find it worthy to serve you in your need."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>With that Hagen and Volker, the twain together, went</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In front of the great Minster. 'Twas done with this intent,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That they might make it certain that the king's wife would need</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To crowd them as she enter'd: their mien was grim indeed.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then came the land's Upholder, and eke his lady fair.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And deck'd about the body with raiment rich and rare</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>One saw the doughty warriors along with them go by;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The dust aloft was whirling from Kriemhild's chivalry.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Now when the mighty ruler in armour saw array'd</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The kings and their companions, how quickly then he said:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Why thus my friends behold I marching with helmets on?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>'T would grieve me, on my honour, had aught to them been done.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" I'll gladly make atonement, however they think good;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If any here have vext them in either heart or mood,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I give them full assurance that sorely vext am I;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And whatsoe'er they bid me I'll do it readily."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>To this made answer Hagen: " By none have we been harm'd.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>It is my masters' custom to go thus fully arm'd</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To every courtly meeting,—until three days have run;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To Etzel we will tell it if aught to us be done."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>This answer made by Hagen Kriemhilda heard right well.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How hatefully upon him her sidelong glances fell!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet would she not more frankly her country's customs own,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Though they to her a long time in Burgundy were known.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Yet though her hate towards him so cruel was and fell,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If anyone to Etzel the truth had dared to tell,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He doubtless had prevented what came to pass ere long:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But none of them would tell it, her mastery was so strong.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then with the queen advancing there came a mighty band;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But this same pair of warriors deign'd not to take their stand</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Two hand-breadths further backward, which made the Hunfolk wroth.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ay, they must press and jostle with those bold heroes both.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The chamberlains of Etzel were ill-content at this,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And would upon the warriors have somewhat wrought amiss,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If they had dared to do it the king's High Grace before.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>There was a mighty jostling, but so far nothing more.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When service now was ended and they would thence be gone,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>All suddenly on horseback appear'd full many a Hun;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And many a beauteous lady was with Kriemhilda seen;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Full seven thousand warriors came riding with the queen.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>riemhilda with her ladies within the window sat</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>\.long with royal Etzel: well pleased was he thereat,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rain would they see the jousting those doughty heroes show'd:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>\.y! in the lists before them what warriors strange there rode!</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>\nd thither had the marshal, the right brave Dankwart, too,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I!ome with his squires attending: his lords' own retinue</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>IVith him, too, he had taken from the Burgundian land,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rhe steeds for the bold Niblungs well saddled were at hand.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>iVhen they their steeds had mounted—the kings and every man—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Forthwith the stalwart Volker to counsel them began,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rhat all should tilt together after their country's mode;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>[n course of which, thereafter, the chiefs right nobly rode.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>For what the hero counsell'd they did not underrate,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rhe crowding and the shouting were both exceeding great.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Vithin the wide inclosure was gather'd many a man;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rhen Etzel and Kriemhilda to gaze thereon began.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Six hundred knights together upon the field appear'd,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rhe warriors of Dietrich, coming the guests toward,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>rhey thought with the Burgundians some knightly sport to try,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A.nd would, had he allow'd it, have done it readily.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>A.y me! what goodly warriors forthwith towards them made!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But when to the lord Dietrich the news thereof was said,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With Gunther's men forbade he that any sport should be.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He fear'd for his retainers: and surely need had he.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When they of Bern pass'd onward, and from the place had gone,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The men from Bechelaren, of Riideger's, came on.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Before the hall five hundred with shield on arm rode they:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Well pleased had been the margrave could they have kept away.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then wisely, as behoved him, he rode the host throughout.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And said unto his warriors, they could no longer doubt</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But that the men of Gunther ill will towards them had:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If they would leave the combat he would in truth be glad.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When these now had pass'd onward—high-mettled heroes bold—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Came horsemen from Thuringia, as hath to us been told;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And then the knights of Denmark, a thousand gallant men;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>One saw right many a lance-shaft fly in the onset then.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then Haward came and Irnfried unto the tournament.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The Rhinelanders a challenge to them had proudly sent.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The warriors of Thuringia were offer'd many a joust;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In many a noble buckler were lances deeply thrust.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>There, too, the lordly Bloedlin came with his thousands three.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By Etzel and Kriemhilda right closely watch'd was he;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For all the knightly jousting was held within their sight.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The queen rejoiced to see it for Burgundy's despite.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And Gibecke and Scrutan unto the melde rode,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With Hornboge and Ramung, all in the Hunnish mode.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They held the lists, withstanding the chiefs of Burgundy;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And over the king's palace the shafts went whirling high.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Whate'er was done by any was nothing else but sound.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Loud was the din that echo'd palace and hall around,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>From clash of shields and bucklers, by Gunther's liegemen made 3</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whence praises and great honour unto his folk were paid.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The ardour of their pastime so mighty was and great,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That from the goodly horses whereon the heroes sate</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The snow-white foam was soaking through the caparisons.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In every courtly fashion they sought to meet the Huns.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then up and spake the minstrel, Volker the fiddle-player:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"I trow that to withstand us these warriors will not dare.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I've ever heard it said that they hate us verily;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now is the time to show it;? better ne'er will be.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Straightway unto the stables," so Volker loudly cried,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" We'll have the horses taken; till towards the eventide</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>We'll ride some further courses, if there be time enow.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>What if to us Burgundians the queen some praise allow! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then saw they some one coming; with stately mien rode he.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Such that no other Hunsman with him compared could be.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Belike in some high lattice a sweetheart there he had;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>No knightly bride was ever than he more fairly clad,</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then Volker said: " How can I pass over such a chance?</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yon darling of the ladies must feel a thrust of lance,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>There 's not a man could help it! 'twill stand him in his life:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I care not though I anger thereby King Etzel's wife."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" For love of me, forbear ye! " King Gunther quickly spake;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" These people will upbraid us if we the onset make;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Let ye the Huns begin it, more seemly 'twere, I ween."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Now all this time King Etzel was sitting by the queen.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" I'll make the hubbub greater," quoth Hagen, in his turn;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"We needs must let the ladies and these same champions learn</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How we can sit our horses: 'twill be good sport withal,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Though little praise to any of Gunther's men befall."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then rode the ready Volker into the fray again:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whereby had many a woman, ere long, right grievous pain.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The noble Hunsman's body transfix'd he with his spear;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Which soon both wife and maiden bewail'd with many a tear.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>With hurtling speed did Hagen rush forward with his men,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His sixty chosen warriors; and quickly rode he then</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Upon the fiddler's footsteps, to where the joust was held.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Both Etzel and Kriemhilda plainly the whole beheld.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The kings were all unwilling their minstrel brave to leave</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Amid the foemen fighting, and succour none to give;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A thousand heroes therefore towards him deftly rode,—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>In high-accomplish'd fashion they did whate'er they would.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When that the noble Hunsman in death was stricken low,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>One heard among his kinsmen complaints and cries of woe.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And all the folk were asking: " Who can this deed have done? "</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Volker, the fearless minstrel, yon fiddler is the one! "</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>For swords and bucklers called they, and held them soon in hand,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The kinsmen of this margrave of the Hungarian land.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>They would have set on Volker, and slain him where he stood;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The host ran from his window with all the haste he could.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then rose a mighty tumult among the people all.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The kings and their attendants dismounted at the hall;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Behind the throng his charger sent each Burgundian;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>King Etzel came: to sever the nobles he began.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>From one of the Hun's kinsmen, who chanced by him to stand,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He seiz'd a deadly weapon, and wrench'd it from his hand;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then drave the people backwards, for very wroth was he:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>'• How vain unto these warriors had been my courtesy</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" If ye had slain the minstrel before my very face; "</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So spake to them King Etzel: " that were a foul disgrace!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For well I marked him riding, what time he pierced the Hun,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And through no fault on his part, but by a slip, 'twas done.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" To leave my guests in freedom, I charge ye to take heed."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So gave he them safe-conduct; then led they every steed</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Unto the hostel stables; and many squires they had</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right diligent in service, who did whate'er they bade.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The host into the palace took with his friends his way.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>No wrath in any of them would he allow to stay.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>The tables were made ready, the water was brought in:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet bitter foes in plenty had they from o'er the Rhine.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Ere all the lords were seated a good long time was spent;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whilst tortured was Kriemhilda by cares within her pent.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>She said: " I seek thy counsel, O prince of Bern, thy grace</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And aid: in sooth my business is now in evil case."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then Hildebrand made answer, a worthy warrior he:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Whoever slays the Niblungs shall have no help from me,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Nay, not for any treasure! thereby he grief may get:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>These knights of ready courage have ne'er been conquer'd yet."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>And, in his courtly fashion, thereto Sir Dietrich spake:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>"O mighty queen, I pray thee, thy purpose to forsake.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To me thy kinsmen never have done such injury,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That I the gallant warriors in combat would defy.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" The wish doth ill beseem thee, most noble prince's wife,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That thou anent thy kinsfolk wouldst plot against their life.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Trusting unto thy favour they came unto this land:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Siegfried is not avenged by aid of Dietrich's hand."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When she could find no falseness the knight of Bern within,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Then on the spot she promised to give to Bloedelin</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>A far-extending march-land, which Nudung own'd of yore.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>As Dankwart shortly slew him, he thought of it no more.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Quoth she: " Thou ought'st to aid me, my good Sir Bloedelin,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>For in this very palace are now these foes of mine</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Who slew my husband Siegfried, so well-beloved of me.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To him who helps avenge him, I ever bound shall be."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>To her then answer'd Bloedel: " Lady, be sure of this,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>To them, for fear of Etzel, I dare do naught amiss.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Since he thy kinsmen happy is ever fain to see.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And did I aught to hurt them, he ne'er would pardon me."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Nay, rather, my lord Bloedel, your friend I'll ever be.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Guerdon of gold and silver I will bestow on thee;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And eke a lovely damsel—Nudung's betrothed bride—</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whom thou mayst love and cherish right gladly at thy side.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>"The land, too, and the castles, all unto thee I give;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So, noble knight, thou mayest in gladness ever live,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If thou but winn'st the earldom which Nudung held in fee.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Whate'er to-day I promise, in truth I'll give to thee."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When now the noble Bloedel the guerdon heard her tell,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And seeing that the damsel in beauty pleased him well,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>By means of strife he purposed to earn this lovely wife:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>But for that cause the warrior was doom'd to lose his life.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Unto the queen then spake he: " Within the hall go back;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Ere any guess my purpose, an uproar I will make.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Hagen will have to answer for what to you he wrought;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>King Gunther's man, I warrant, shall bound to you be brought."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" Now arm yourselves," cried Bloedel, " my gallant liegemen all!</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>We will upon the foemen within the hostel fall;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>I may not be acquitted of this by Etzel's wife.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>On this must every hero among us stake his life."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>When the queen found that Bloedel was on the fray intent,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>She tarried there no longer, but back to table went</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And sat beside King Etzel and with his men as well:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>She for the guests' undoing had taken counsel fell.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Since means there were not elsewise to cause the strife to start,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>(Kriemhilda's olden sorrow lay graven in her heart)</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>She bade them bring to table King Etzel's little son:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>How could a vengeful woman more cruelly have done?</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>Then went that self-same minute of Etzel's liegemen four,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And thither from his chamber the young king Ortlieb bore</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Unto the prince's table, where Hagen also sate.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>(The boy was doom'd to perish through Hagen's deadly hate.)</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>As soon as mighty Etzel espied his little son,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>He turned to his wife's kinsmen and spake in kindly tone:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>" Now, my good friends, behold ye, my only son is he.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And eke your sister's offspring: which well for you may be.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" If he his kindred likens, he'll be a gallant wight,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Right powerful and noble, a well-grown man of might.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Should I live some while longer he'll own a dozen lands;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>So look ye for good service at my young Ortlieb's hands.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" I therefore fain would pray you, O well-loved friends of mine</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>When ye are homeward riding unto the river Rhine,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That ye upon the journey would take your sister's son,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And let your loving kindness unto the child be shown.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" And rear him up in honour till he to manhood grow.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>If any in your borders hath wrought you any woe,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>When he is of full stature he will your vengeance aid."</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>King Etzel's wife Kriemhilda heard also what he said.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>" If unto days of manhood the child should grow and thrive,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>These thanes, I trow," said Hagen, " their trust to him will give.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Yet the young king, meseemeth, is of a weakly sort:</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Folk will not often see me attending Ortlieb's court."</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The king look'd round at Hagen,—this speech had vext him sore;</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>And though, with princely breeding, he spake thereof no more,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>His heart was very heavy and troubled was his mind.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Nor was the mood of Hagen a whit to joy inclined.</span></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span>The princes all were sorry, together with the king,</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>That of his child had Hagen e'er spoken such a thing.</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>With ill content they bore it: nor knew they aught at all</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span>Of what through this same warrior was shortly to befall.</span></span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
