<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure I.— KRIEMHILDA.</h2>
			<p>
				<span>TO us, in olden legends, is many a marvel told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of praise-deserving heroes, of labours manifold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of weeping and of wailing, of joy and festival ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye shall of bold knights' battling now hear a wondrous tale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A very noble maiden grew up in Burgundy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than hers no greater beauty in any land might be :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maid was called Kriemhilda — a woman passing fair —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whose sake many a warrior his life must needs forbear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To love that lovely maiden seem'd but to be her due ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None bore her spite, and many did for her favour sue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair were beyond all measure her noble form and face :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her virtues were sufficient all womankind to grace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Three noble kings and wealthy guarded her as their own :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Gunther and Sir Gemot, for deeds of honour known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Giselher the youngest, a gallant warrior he :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lady was the sister and ward of all the three.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The^fe 'prine^s were right gentle, and came of noble race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold, and of strength unequalled, peerless in knightly grace ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" The kingdom of Burgundia," thus was their country hight ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Etzel's land rang later with their great deeds of might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At Worms upon the Rhine flood, they dwelt in power and might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, in fealty, served them full many a haughty knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With honourable service throughout their earthly life. —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That life had woeful ending from two great ladies' strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Their mother was Dame Ute, a queen exceeding rich,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Dankrat was their father, broad lands he left to each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he this life departed ; he was a mighty man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, e'en while yet a stripling, his knightly deeds began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The three kings, who came after, were, as I've said before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All men of strength and valour ; and to them fealty swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flower of noble knighthood, of whom with truth 'twas said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That strong they were and dauntless,, in sharp fight undismayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Foremost of them was Hagen, of Tronj^ ; then his brother, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Dankwart the swift-footed ; Ortwein of Metz another ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Eckewart and Gere, who both were margraves hight ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Volker of Alsatia, — a stout and proven knight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rumold the kitchen-master, a knight of high degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sindold and Hunold also, whose duty 'twas to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That courtly rites and honours were aye observed well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many another gallant, whom time would fail to tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dankwart, he was the Marshal, his nephew Ortwein bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The office of High Sewer, in that proud court of yore ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Sindold was Cup-bearer, and a bold knight men say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain was Hunold ; all honourable they.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of all this courtly service, and of their far-famed might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the worth and valour of each heroic knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of their life as courtiers, through all their joyous days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give a true account were beyond my simple lays.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile, amid this splendour, the maid Kriemhilda dreamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>TThat she had reared a falcon, — strong, fair and wild he seem'd —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>TAnd that two eagles rent him before her very eyes ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>TNo worse grief could life bring her in any evil guise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick to her mother Ute she told the vision dread, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, after her own manner, the dream interpreted :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" This falcon of thy rearing, thy noble husband he, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now may God defend him, or he is lost to thee ! "</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"What sayest thou of husbands, O dearest mother mine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never for hero's wooing shall I, your daughter, pine !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spotless and fair would I be, as now, unto my death ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would forego the sorrow that lurks man's love beneath."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Forswear not Love thus lightly," her mother answer gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" If heart's joy ever reach thee in life, as women crave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through man's love thou must gain it ; — thou wert a seemly bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If God do not deny thee a good knight at thy side."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>** Ah, let alone such counsel, my mother dear, I pray !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By many a woman's witness 'tis proven, clear as day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How heart's delight too often with sorrow sore is paid ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest such mischance befall me, I'll shun them both," she said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, in her mind Kriemhilda held ever Love at bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lived in happy freedom for many a merry day ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caring for nought and no one ; — and yet it was her fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be one day, in honour, a gallant warrior's mate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It was the self-same falcon that she in dreams did see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as her mother told her ; and bloody was to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her vengeance on her kinsmen, by whom the deed was done ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one man's death did perish full many a mother's son.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
