<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XIV.— HOW THE QUEENS RAILED AT ONE ANOTHER</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before the hour of vespers one day the tumult loud</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was heard, of many warriors, who in the court did crowd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their knightly feats they practised to pass the time away:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a man and woman ran up to watch the play.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The noble queens were seated together, side by side,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They thought of two bold warriors, renowned far and wide.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then said the fair Kriemhilda: " I have indeed a lord</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who rightly is the ruler of all this kingdom broad."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then cried the Lady Brunhild: " Howe'er could such thing be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unless there were none living but only thou and he?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beneath his rule the kingdom might fall in such a case:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So long as Gunther liveth, it could not come to pass."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But then again said Kriemhild: " There stands he; dost thou see</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How he before the warriors doth walk right royally?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Just as the moon all brightly above the stars doth shine!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Good cause have I for wearing this happy mood of mine."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Lady Brunhild answer'd: " Comely as is thy lord,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And gallant too and handsome, thou must the meed award</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto thy brother Gunther, the noble warrior:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who, be it known, is truly all other kings before."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But yet again said Kriemhild: " Mine is a man so rare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That not without good reason his praises I declare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By many deeds great honour he hath won, far and near;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou wilt allow, Brunhilda, he well is Gunther's peer.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" I pray thee now, Kriemhilda, take it not ill of me,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I, too, have grounds for saying what I have said to thee:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I heard them both allow it, when them I first look'd on,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, as he would, against me the king my wager won,—</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>What time my love he gained in such a knightly siege,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried himself confessed it, that he was Gunther's liege.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore I hold him vassal, I heard him that allow."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the fair Kriemhilda: " For me 'twere ill enow I</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" How could my noble brother have hansell'd so for me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That of a mere retainer the good-wife I should be?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I do beseech thee, Brunhild, in all true friendliness,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Oblige me of your kindness and let these cavils cease."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon the king's wife answer'd: " I will not let it be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Why should I yield my claim to so many a good knight's fee,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who, like the thane, thy husband, doth suit and service owe? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At this the beauteous Kriemhild began with wrath to glow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" The thought thou must abandon, that he to thee did e'er</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Owe any kind of service; he is far worthier</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than is my brother Gunther,—right noble though he be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Withdraw me now this saying that I have heard from thee!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" I cannot choose but wonder, since he thy vassal is,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thou o'er our two persons hast mastery like this,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he his dues unto you hath set so long aside!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With right do I demur to thine overweening pride."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Thou ratest thyself too highly! " the king's wife answer'd then,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Now will I gladly prove me whether thou hast of men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As much respect and honour as they accord to me! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By this time both the ladies were wrathful as could be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then cried the Lady Kriemhild: " This must at once be seen!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If that my lord's thy vassal, as thou hast sworn, O queen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To-day must I the liegemen of both the kings let know</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whether before the king's wife to church I dare to go.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" This very day I'll show thee that I am fealty-free,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And that my man's more worthy than ever thine will be I</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I myself, moreover, will not be slighted so:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou shalt to-day be witness how I, thy vassal, go</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To court before the warriors of royal Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll prove myself more worthy than e'er was known to be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Any princess whatever who here hath worn the crown! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus hate enough and envy betwixt the dames was sown.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Dost thou deny," cried Brunhild, "that thou our vassal art?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So must thou with thy women keep from my train apart.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When I and my attendants unto the minster go."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To that Kriemhilda answer'd: " In truth, it shall be so! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Now robe yourselves, my maidens," commanded Siegfried's wife.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" For we no shame must suffer whilst here we live our life;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ye have rich apparel ye must let all folk see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She shall repent at leisure what she hath said to me! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There was small need to urge them: they sought their richest gear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a dame and maiden right well-dight did appear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When came with her attendants the noble Gunther's dame,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then also in fine raiment the fair Kriemhilda came.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With three and forty maidens, whom she to Rhine had brought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who wore fine-woven silk stuffs in Araby y-wrought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So came unto the minster the comely maidens all:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They found all Siegfried's liegemen waiting before the hall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The people fell to marvel how it had come about</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That these two royal ladies had plainly fallen out.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And went no more together, as erewhile they were fain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefrom befell hereafter sore woe to many a thane.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther's wife stood waiting before the minster door;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The while much pleasant pastime had many a warrior</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With the fair waiting- women, whom she with her did bring;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then came the noble Kriemhild with her brave following.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Such costume as the daughters of noble knights might wear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Compared with what her maids wore was common as the air;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In gear she was so wealthy, that thirty queens had shown</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No such display of raiment as this fair queen alone.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Had anyone been wishful he never could have said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That any richer clothing had e'er been worn of maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than on that day adorned her noble company:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Except to vex Brunhilda, Kriemhild had let it be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The two queens came together before the minster wide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thereupon the hostess, by hatred moved and pride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With evil voice and gesture Kriemhilda bade to stay:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Before the queen a vassal shall ne'er take right of way I"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the fair Kriemhilda: (and wrathful was her mood)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Couldst thou but have been silent, for thee it had been good!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou hast disgraced thy beauty and stain'd thy purity:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How should a shameless wanton a king's wife ever be? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Whom art thou calling 'Wanton'? " in answer cried the queen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" That call I thee," quoth Kriemhild'; " thy body fair hath been</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Woo'd first, not by thy husband, but by my lord, Siegfried:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow 'twas not my brother who won thy maidenhead!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Where hadst thou left thy senses? it was a trick of his.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Why didst thou let him woo thee, who but thy liegeman is?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I hear thee," said Kriemhilda, " without all reason scold."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Now this, in truth," cried Brunhild, " shall be to Gunther told! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" And why should that annoy me? thy pride hath thee betray'd:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To cite me to thy service by word thou hast essay'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This know now, of a surety I grieve that it be so:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All confidence is over for aye betwixt us two."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Brunhilda wept, but Kriemhild no longer tarried there;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the king's wife passing, with all her maidens fair,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She went into the minster: such hate did this beget</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That many bright eyes later were sore bedimm'd and wet.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>How much soe'er they worshipp'd, by service and by song,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the Queen Brunhilda the time seem'd all too long:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So full she was of trouble, in body and in mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For which hereafter suffer'd bold warriors and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Brunhilda with her women stay'd by the minster door;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She thought: "Now must Kriemhilda, let me hear somethingmore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of what she rail'd so loudly,—the scolding, sharp-tongued wife!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If Siegfried hath been boasting, 'twill stand him in his life."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Forth came the noble Kriemhild, with many gallant men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dame Brunhild called unto her: " Now stand you still again,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You said I was a wanton, that shall you prove to me:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That word of yours be certain, hath stung me bitterly! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereto said dame Kriemhilda: " 'Twere best to let me fare!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By this gold ring I'll prove it, which on my hand I wear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas brought to me by Siegfried when by your side he lay."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne'er yet had Queen Brunhilda outlived a sadder day.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake; " This golden jewel was from me stol'n away,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And hath from me most wrongly been hidden many a day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I now at last discover who stole my ring from me! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By this time were both ladies in direst enmity.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Yet spake Kriemhilda further: " I will not pass for thief!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou mightst have kept thy counsel, to thee were honour lief.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This girdle be my witness, that round my waist I wear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I am not a liar. Ay! Siegfried was thy dear."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The girdle she was wearing was silk from Nineveh,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With precious stones for fastening, right good it was to see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When dame Brunhild beheld it to weeping she did fall:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It must be told to Gunther and to his lieges all.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the queen in answer: " Go hence, and bring to me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The sovran-prince of Rhineland, and from my lips shall he</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hear how his sister flouts me, and slandereth my life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By openly declaring I have been Siegfried's wife 1 "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king came with his warriors; and when the weeping eyes</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He saw of his belov'd one, he spake, in kindly wise:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Now tell me, dearest lady, who hath done aught to thee? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the king she answered: " Aye joyless must I be 1</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Kriemhilda of mine honour would like to cozen me;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, seeing she's thy sister, I make complaint to thee.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She swears I've played the wanton with her own man, Siegfried."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then answer'd the King Gunther: " She doth an evil deed! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" She weareth here my girdle, which I so long have lost,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My ring of red gold likewise. To me 'tis bittermost</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That e'er my mother bore me. An' thou wilt not disprove,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>O king, this grievous scandal, no longer thee I'll love."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then up and spake King Gunther: " Siegfried shall now appear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If he hath play'd the braggart, he shall the truth declare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or else deny the slander,—this knight of Netherland! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then did Kriemhilda's husband right soon before them stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as he had look'd on these dames discomfited,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(Naught knowing of the matter) the noble Siegfried said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Why are these ladies weeping? that am I fain to hear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And wherefore I am bidden before the King to appear? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake to him King Gunther: " Right sorrowful am I;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To me my wife Brunhilda hath told a history</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That thou thyself hast boasted her first love to have won:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thy wife, Kriemhild, declareth that thou, thane, this hast done."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the noble Siegfried: " And if she so hath said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before I rest I'll see that for this she be repaid!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In face of all your lieges I'm ready to aver</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By oath of mine most solemn, I never told it her! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the King of Rhineland: "Give proof of that must thou!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The oath which thou dost offer, if thou canst take it now,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From ev'ry untrue deahng I'll hold thee clear and free."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then in a ring around him stood they of Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His hand the gallant Siegfried outstretched the oath to take.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the mighty sovran: "So certain do I make</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of thy great innocency, that I will thee acquit:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sure what my sister charges thou never didst commit."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Yet once again spake Siegfried: " And if she joy doth find</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In that she hath so troubled Brunhilda's peace of mind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My sorrow, of a surety, too deep were to be told."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then look'd at one another these ready knights and bold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" So should one train one's women," the hero Siegfried said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" That suchlike haughty speeches should aye be left unsaid:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto thy wife forbid them, to mine I'll do the same;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such ill-advised behaviour doth fill my heart with shame."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By this dispute were many fair women kept apart.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brunhilda still the matter so sorely took to heart</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That needs must Gunther's warriors feel pity for the dame.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen, knight of Tronje, unto his lady came.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He bade her say what ail'd her, finding her weeping sore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then told she him the story, and unto her he swore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That either Kriemhild's husband must for the lie repent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or he himself thereafter would never live content.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwein and also Gemot, in council join'd the twain;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And there the heroes plotted how Siegfried should be slain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Giselher came likewise, the noble Ute's son;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he had heard their saying, he spake,—the faithful one:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Alack! ye gallant warriors, now wherefore do ye that?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow that never Siegfried deserved such like hate.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he, by reason of it, should need to lose his life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay, very trifles are they that make an angry wife! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Are we to harbour cuckoos? " cried Hagen, answering:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" To gallant knights as we are scant honour that would bring!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he of my dear lady hath bragg'd so scurvily</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His life shall make atonement; or I myself will die."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king himself spake, saying: " Naught hath he to us done</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Save what is good and worthy; so let his life alone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What matter though the warrior were hateful now to me?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He hath been ever faithful and that right willingly."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the warrior Ortwein, who came from Metz, and said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" His great strength, of a surety, shall give him little aid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If now my lord allow me, short shrift of him I'll make."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus, without cause, the heroes the part of foes did take.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But none went any further, save Hagen, who for aye.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was pressing upon Gunther this counsel day by day:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That, if King Siegfried lived not, to him would subject be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The broad lands that he governed ;— the king heard ruefully.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They let the matter rest; then to jousting did they take.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ha! many a sturdy lance-shaft for Siegfried's wife they brake</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In shadow of the minster, up to the royal hall!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet were some men of Gunther's but ill-content withal.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king spake: " Lay aside now this murd'rous hate and scorn;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto our weal and honour he verily was born.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So fierce his strength is also, this marvellous-bold knight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had he of this an inkling, none durst withstand his might."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" He'll never know," quoth Hagen, " save thou should let it out!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow that I in secret can bring it so about</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That for Brunhilda's weeping sore reckoning he shall pay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yea, verily is Hagen his enemy for aye."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the royal Gunther: "And how may that be done? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Hagen said in answer: " That will I now make known.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We'll bid two unknown envoys to ride as from afar</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto our land, 'fore all men to challenge us to war.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Then thou, before the guests, wilt declare that thou must go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To battle, with thy liegemen; and when he that doth know</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He'll offer you his service: so shall he lose his life.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll seek to learn his secret from the bold warrior's wife."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his vassal Gunther in evil hour gave ear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With treason foul to tamper, ere any grew aware,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Began those chosen warriors of chivalry the boast.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By wrangling of two women was many a hero lost.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
