<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXIV.— HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID THEIR ERRAND.</h2>

1422. 
When Etzel to the Rhineland had sent his embassy, 
The news thereof right swiftly from land to land did fly : 
He greeting gave and bade them, by messengers right fleet, 
To come unto his feasting : whence many death did meet. 



XXIV.] HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID. 243 

1423. 
From out the Huns' dominions the envoys swiftly went 
To the Burgundian country ; for thither were they sent 
Three noble kings to summon, and eke their chivalry, 
To come and visit Etzel : so rode they speedily. 

1424. 
First were they on their journey to Bechelaren brought ; 
The folk there served them gladly. That he might fail in naught 
By them unto the Rhineland sent greeting Riideger, 
As also did Gotlinda and eke their daughter dear. 

1425. 
Nor did they send them further without a proper meed, 
Whereby the men of Etzel made all the better speed. 
To Ute and her children sent message Riideger, 
To say there lived no margrave who meant them kindlier, 

1426. 
Unto Brunhilda also a kindly greeting went, 
Of good faith ever steadfast, and friendliest intent. 
When they these words had taken, forth would the envoys fare : 
That God in Heaven would keep them, was Gotelinda's prayer. 

1427. 
Ere yet the envoys fully had cross'd Bavarian ground, 
The ever-ready Werbel the worthy bishop found. 
What message for his kinsmen upon the Rhine he told 
Thereof I have no knowledge ; save that in ruddy gold 

1428. 
He gave the twain a token before he let them ride. 
Quoth Pilgerin the bishop : " And could I at my side 
See them, so were I happy, — these sister's sons of mine: 
Scarce can I come to see them, myself, unto the Rhine." 



244 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [aDV. 

1429. 
The ways by which they travell'd o'er land unto the Rhine, 
I cannot say for certain. Silver and raiment fine 
By none from them was stolen : men fear'd their lord's despite — 
That king of noble lineage — ay, potent was his might ! 

1430. 
In the Burgundian country, to Worms upon the Rhine 
Came, after twelve days' riding, Werbel and Schwemmelin. 
Unto the king the tidings were told, and to his men, 
Of foreign envoys coming. Gunther made question then. 

1431- 
Quoth he, the Lord of Rhineland : " Who can to us declare 
Whence come these foreign riders that through our country fare ? " 
But that was known to no one : till Hagen of Tronje, 
As soon as he had seen them, did thus to Gunther say: 

1432. 
" Strange news to us is coming that much I will aver. 
The fiddle-players of Etzel I have but now seen here. 
Unto the Rhine your sister hath sent them, verily ; 
For sake of both their sovereigns right welcome must they be.'» 

1433- 
Meanwhile before the palace in full array they rode ; 
No prince's minstrels ever in nobler fashion show'd. 
The royal court-folk hasten'd to meet them presently : 
They bade men take their mantles and found them hostelry. 

1434. 
Their travelling clothes were costly, with work so deftly done 
That they might well with honour before the king have gone. 
Yet in the same apparel to court they would not go : 
Who cared for it might have it, the envoys let men know. 



XXIV.] HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID. 245 

1435- 
Without delay they met with folk who were well content 
To take the clothing gladly ; and unto them 'twas sent. 
And thereupon the strangers put on far better gear, 
As it behoves kings' heralds in full array to wear. 

1436. 
So went, when leave was given, to where the monarch sat 
Those followers of Etzel : and all were glad thereat. 
With courtesy did Hagen towards the heralds make. 
And gave them kindly greeting, for which their thanks they spake. 

1437- 
To learn from them the tidings to questioning he fell, 
If Etzel and his lieges were faring all right well ? 
Then answer'd him the minstrel : " Ne'er throve the country more, 
Nor were the folk so happy, — of that thou may'st be sure." 

1438. 
Towards the host then went they. Crowded the palace was ; 
Unto the guests was offer'd such kindly welcome as 
In foreign kings' dominions is ever given of right. 
And there, in Gunther's service, found Werbel many a knight. 

1439- 
And graciously King Gunther began to greet them then : 
" Be both of ye right welcome, ye Hunnish minstrelmen, 
And your companions also. Ye are, I understand, 
Sent hither by great Etzel to the Burgundian land?" 

1440. 
Before the king they bow'd them, and then spake Werbelin : 
" To thee his service offers that w^ell-loved lord of mine ; 
And to this land thy sister Kriemhilda greeting saith. 
They send us to you warriors trusting in your good faith." 



246 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1441. 
The mighty prince made answer : "Of this right glad am I. 
And tell me how is Etzel," so did the king reply. 
*' And eke my sister Kriemhild, yonder in Hunnish land ? " 
Then spake the fiddle-player : " I'll answer this demand. 

1442. 
" Of this ye may be certain, that never yet there were 
Two folks who lived together more happy than this pair ; 
And all the knights around them, their kinsfolk and their men. 
When on this ride we started, right joyous were they then." 

1443- 
" Gramercy for the greeting he hath sent me this day, 
And thank my sister also ; since it be as ye say, 
That all live in contentment, ruler and ruled as well : 
For I with some misgiving, ask'd ye the news to tell." 

1444. 
The king's two younger brothers had likewise come by now : 
For they the news from Hunsland but now had got to know. 
And Giselher right gladly, for his dear sister's sake, 
Set eyes upon the envoys and kindly to them spake. 

1445- 
" Right welcome must ye heralds be unto me and mine, 
And if ye rode more often hither unto the Rhine, 
Friends would ye find here always rejoicing ye to see. 
That aught should here befall you small peril can there be." 

1446. 
" We trust you in all honour," made answer Schwemmelin. 
•* And never can I tell you by any wit of mine, 
How Etzel hath enjoin'd us to greet you lovingly, 
As hath your noble sister, who there hath honour high. 



XXIV.] HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID. 247 

1447. 
" Of former faith and kindness the queen doth you remind, 
And how with heart and body you aye to her inclined. 
But to the king's self firstly have we been sent, to pray 
That into Etzel's country ye deign to take your way. 

1448. 
*' That we thereto should urge ye hath given strict command 
The rich and mighty Etzel, who likewise doth demand 
That if ye by your sister would not again be seen, 
Then would he fain have knowledge of what his fault hath been 



1449. 
"That ye are strangers to him, and to his country, too ; 
For if the Queen Kriemhilda were all unknown to you, 
Still he himself were worthy for you to come to see. 
And were this thing to happen, 'twould please him verily." 

1450. 
Then spake the royal Gunther : " A week from now being gone, 
So will I give you tidings of what conclusion 
My friends and I have come to. Meanwhile for you 'twere best 
To go unto your hostel, and may ye have good rest." 

1451- 
But Werbelin spake further : '* If such a thing might be, 
Fain would we have permission my lady first to see — 
I mean the mighty Ute^ — before our rest we seek. 
Then Giselher the noble in courtly wise did speak : 

1452. 
" That no man shall deny you ; and if to her ye go, 
Ye will my mother's pleasure right well accomplish so : 
For gladly will she see ye ; and for my sister's sake, 
The Lady Kriemhild namely, you welcome will she make." 



248 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1453- 
So Giselher he brought them to where they found the dame. 
With joy she saw the heralds who from the Huns' land came ; 
And heartily did greet them, so kindly was her mood. 
Then told they her the tidings those courtly heralds good. 

1454- 
Spake Schwemmelin in this wise : " My lady sends to thee 
Her faithful love and duty ; and if it so might be 
That she could see you often, she bids you to believe 
That in this world would nothing more gladness to her give.** 

1455- 
Whereto the queen made answer : " Alas, it may not be ! 
Often as I am longing my daughter dear to see, 
Too distant dwelleth from me your noble monarch's wife. 
May she and Etzel ever be blessdd in their life. 

1456. 
" But ye must give me warning, ere from this place ye fare, 
When ye will be returning ; for heralds saw I ne'er 
For long days past so gladly, as I have look'd on you." 
The squires then gave their promise her will therein to do. 

1457- 
And so unto their hostel the men from Hunsland went. 
Meanwhile for friends and kinsmen the mighty king had sent. 
The noble Gunther question put unto every man 
What thought he of the matter. And many then began 

1458. 
To say that he might fairly ride unto Etzel's land. 
So counsell'd him the warriors who did around him stand, 
Excepting only Hagen, — to whom 'twas bitter woe. 
He told the king in secret : " Thou wilt thyself undo. 



XXIV.] HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID. 249 

1459- 
" Thou know'st as well as I do what thing we wrought of yore : 
Needs must we of Kriemhilda be fearful evermore, 
Seeing I slew her husband, and that with mine own hand. 
How durst we take this journey and ride to Etzel's land ? " 

1460. 
Then spake the mighty Gunther : " My sister's wrath was spent. 
Pardon to us she granted, ere from this place she went, 
With kisses of forgiveness, for what to her was done : 
Unless, it may be, Hagen, that thee she hates alone." 

1461. 
** Be not deceived," said Hagen, " whate'er the message be 
The envoys bring from Hunsland. Would you Kriemhilda see, 
Be well prepared to forfeit your honour and your life : 
Long- waiting in her vengeance is she. King Etzel's wife." 

1462. 
Thereon the princely Gemot unto the council said : 
" Because that thou with reason to lose thy life dost dread 
Within the Huns' dominions, must we then lay aside 
This plan to see our sister ? right ill would that betide." 

1463. 
Prince Giselher then also spake thus unto the knight : 
" Since thou, friend Hagen, knowest thou art the guilty wight, 
So stay thou here in safety and of thyself take care, 
And let, with us, the bold ones unto my sister fare." 

1464. 
With wrath began to kindle the warrior of Tronje : 
" I will not have another go with you on your way. 
Who dares than I more boldly on this court-ride to go. 
Since ye will not be hinder'd, that will I let you know." 



250 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1465. 
Then spake the kitchen-master, Rumold the worthy thane : 
" Here friends and strangers can ye right easily maintain 
As ye yourselves are willing : your stores are full, I trow ; 
And ne'er, I ween, hath Hagen betray'd you hitherto. 

1466. 
" If ye will heed not Hagen, Rumold now counsels you — 
And I have ever served you with love and service true — 
That here ye fain should tarry, out of good will to me. 
And let King Etzel yonder along with Kriemhild be. 

1467. 
" How otherwise in this world could ye e'er better live ? 
In spite of all your foemen here may you right well thrive ; 
You may your bodies freely with raiment rich endue. 
And wine drink of the choicest, and winsome maidens woo. 

1468. 
" Meats, too, are set before ye, — the best that e'er were brought 
To any king in this world ; and if this all were naught, 
You should, methinks, remain here for sake of your fair wife, — 
Ere in such childish fashion you seek to risk your life. 

1469. 
" I counsel your abiding : rich is your heritage. 
At home can vassals better to you redeem their pledge 
Than yonder 'mid the Hun-folk. Who knows how things be 

there ? 
My lords, go ye not thither : thus Rumold doth declare 1 '* 

1470. 

Thereunto answer'd Gemot : " Here will we tarry not, 
Since we such friendly bidding have from my sister got, 
And from the mighty Etzel. Why put the thing aside ? 
Who goes not gladly with us may e'en at home abide." 



XXIV.] HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID. 2$ I 

1471. 
And thereto answer'd Hagen : " See lest ye take amiss 
The words that I have spoken, howe'er ye do in this. 
I give you faithful counsel : as ye regard your life, 
Go well-arm'd to the Hun-folk, as if for battle- strife. 

1472. 
"Will ye not be dissuaded, so send ye for your men, 
The best that ye can muster or any way can gain ; 
And from them all I'll choose ye a thousand warriors good : 
So may ye fear no evil from angry Kriemhild's mood." 

1473- 
" That rede I'll gladly follow," the king in answer said. 
Then sent he heralds riding, who through his kingdom sped. 
And so they brought the warriors, three thousand men or more. 
They dreamt not of the evil that lay for them in store. 

1474. 
All through the lands of Gunther right joyously they rode. 
On every man a charger and raiment were bestow'd — 
Of those who were to journey away from Burgundy. 
A goodly number follow'd the king right willingly. 

1475- 
Then Hagen, lord of Tronje, his brother Dankwart bade 
The four score knights who served them unto the Rhine to lead. 
They came in knightly order ; with arms and wearing gear 
Within King Gunther's borders right soon did they appear. 

1476. 
Now came the gallant Volker, — a high-born minstrel he, — 
To join with thirty liegemen the royal company. 
Such splendid raiment had they, a king had worn it well. 
That he would ride to Hunsland, to Gunther bade he tell. 



252 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [AUV. 

1477- 
Now who was this same Volker I fain would let you know : 
He was of noble lineage ; to him did fealty owe 
In the Burgundian country, full many a noble knight. 
Because he play'd the fiddle he was the Minstrel hight. 

1478. 
Then Hagen chose the thousand : they were to him well-known ; 
And what in hard-fought battles their strength of hand had done, 
And all they e'er had ventured, that had he seen full well. 
No man of aught save valour in all their deeds could tell. 

1479. 
The envoys of Kriemhilda were sore discomfited, 
For they of both their rulers the wrath began to dread ; 
And leave they daily sought for, that they might thence begone. 
But Hagen would not grant it : through cunning that was done. 

1480. 
He said unto his masters : " We must be on our guard 
Lest we to go allow them, before we are prepared 
Within a week thereafter to Etzel's land to go. 
If any ill-will bear us, thus shall we better know. 

1481. 
" So shall not Dame Kriemhilda be taking heed hereto, 
That any, by her counsel, should evil to us do. 
And if it be her purpose her own may be the pain : 
With us to Hunsland take we so many chosen men." 

1482. 
Their bucklers, then, and saddles, and all of such like gear 
As they to Etzel's country had in their minds to bear, 
By many valiant liegemen for use were ready made. 
The envoys of Kriemhilda were unto Gunther bade. 



XXIV.] HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID. 253 

1483. 
And when the heralds enter'd, unto them Gemot said : 
" The king will take the offer to us by Etzel made ; 
And we will come right gladly unto his festival, 
And see again our sister : of that doubt not at all." 

1484. 
Then spake to them King Gunther : " Can ye not tell us, pray, 
When is this merry-making ? or rather, on what day 
'Twere best that we come thither ? " 'Twas Schwemmelin replied : 
" Ye must be there for certain at next Midsummer-tide." 

1485. 
The king unto them granted, if haply they were will'd 
(For not yet had they done it) to see the Dame Brunhild, 
That they with his approval might to her presence go. 
It was gainsaid by Volker : for her sake did he so. 

i486. 
" In sooth the Lady Brunhild is not now in the mood 
For you to look upon her," so spake the warrior good. 
" Wait ye until to-morrow, then her they'll let you see.** 
So hoped they to behold her ; but it was not to be. 

1487. 
The mighty prince then order'd (he held those envoys dear) 
Out of his own great kindness, that folk should thither bear 
His gold upon broad bucklers ; great store thereof he had. 
And by his kinsmen also rich gifts to them were made. 

1488. 
For Giselher and Gemot, Gere and Ortwein, too. 
That they were kindly-hearted right plainly then did shew. 
They such abundant largess unto the envoys gave, 
That, fearful of their rulers, none of it would they have. 



254 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1489. 
Then Werbelin the herald unto the king did say : 
" Your gifts, Lord King, so please ye, let in your kingdom stay ; 
We may not take them with us ; my lord bade us take heed, 
Lest gifts by us be taken : nor is there any need." 

1490. 
Then did the Lord of Rhineland this thing unkindly take, 
That they a great king's treasure of small account should make ; 
So were they bound to take it, his gold and habiting. 
And unto Etzel's country were fain with them to bring. 

1491. 
They would see Ute also ere they set forth again. 
So Giselher the ready brought both the minstrelmen 
Unto his mother Ute. This word the lady sent : 
That if Kriemhild were honour'd her mother was content 

1492. 
Then bade the queen be given of gold and broidery, 
All for the sake of Kriemhild, — so dear to her was she,— 
And for the sake of Etzel, unto the minstrels both. 
They readily might take it : 'twas done in honest troth. 

1493- 
The messengers' leave-taking was done ; and now they had 
Parted from men and maidens ; and so with hearts right glad 
They rode on into Swabia ; thus far 'twas Gernot's will 
His heroes should escort them, that none might do them ill. 

1494. 
When they, who thus did guard them, parted and homewards rode, 
In Etzel's power a safeguard they found on ev'ry road, 
Whence none essay'd to rob them of horse or wearing gear. 
And so to Etzel's country they speedily drew near. 



XXIV.] HOW WERBEL AND SCHWEMMEL DID. 255 

1495- 
Where'er they found acquaintance, to them the news they said: 
How the Burgundian people, ere many days were sped, 
Unto the Hun-folk's country were coming from the Rhine. 
The news was carried also to Bishop Pilgerin. 

1496. 
As they by Bechelaren along the highway went, 
To Riideger folk told it, — as naught could well prevent — 
And also to Gotlinda, the margrave's wedded wife. 
That she was soon to see them was joy unto her life. 

1497- 
Folk saw how with the tidings the minstrels swiftly rode. 
Until they found King Etzel at Gran, where he abode. 
And greeting upon greeting which unto him were sent 
They to the king deliver'd ; ruddy with joy he went. 

1498. 
And when the queen the tidings did fairly understand, 
That verily her brothers were coming to the land, 
In mood she was right happy ; and both the minstrelmen 
With costly gifts rewarded : and honour had she then. 

1499. 
" Now Schwemmelin and Werbel, each one of you," said she, 
" Tell me which of my kinsmen will at our feasting be, 
Of whom the best and dearest unto our land we bade ? 
And, when the news was told him, tell me what Hagen said ? ' 

1500. 
They said : " One morning early he came to the debate. 
And not a good word from him we early had or late ; 
And when the ride to Hunsland was praised by all the folk 
Grim Hagen looked not elsewise than if of death they spoke. 



2S6 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1501. 
" Your brothers here are coming, the noble kings all three, 
In high and lordly humour. But who with them may be 
That news I cannot give you, seeing I do not know ; 
But Volker the bold minstrel hath vow'd with them to go." 

1502. 
'* Him could I spare right blithely," in answer spake the queen : 
" Since many a time and often here Volker have I seen. 
But fain I am of Hagen, the hero excellent ; 
That here we soon shall see him doth give me much content." 

1503- 
Then went the royal lady where she the king did find ; 
How gently Dame Kriemhilda unto him spake her mind ! 
" How do the tidings please thee, my lord beloved," she said, 
" Now all my heart hath yearned for shall be accomplished." 

1504. 
** Thy will is eke my pleasure," thus did the king reply, 
" Nor any of my kindred so glad to see were I, 
If e'er they should be coming hither unto my land. 
For sake of them that love thee is all my trouble bann'd." 

1505- 
King's officers then straightway commandment gave to all 
That seats should be made ready in palace and in hall. 
Meet for the guests beloved who would be there anon. 
By them, ere long, for Etzel was pleasure all fordone. 



XXV.] HOW THE LORDS ALL WENT TO THE HUNS. 25/ 



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
