<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure X.— HOW BRUNHILDA WAS RECEIVED AT WORMS</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now, on the further Rhine-bank, came with a numerous band</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king and his guests with him, and drew nigh to the strand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw, too, by the rein led, full many a maiden's steed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For those who should receive them to wait they had no need.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For when the folk of Iceland unto the ship were led,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke the Niblung people who Siegfried followed,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They put across the water, with quick, unwearied hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To where, upon the quay-side, they saw the king's friends stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now hearken to my story! I'll tell you how the Queen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ute, the rich queen-mother, was with her maidens seen.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Forth coming from the castle, whence she herself did ride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then many an acquaintance 'twixt knight and maid was tied.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Kriemhilda's palfrey led was by Gere the Margrave</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As far as the fort gateway, where Siegfried, warrior brave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must thenceforth wait upon her ;— she was a lovely maid 1</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he by this fair lady was, later, well repaid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Alongside Lady Ute, Ortwein the bold rode he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With many knights and maidens who bare them company.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne'er at a great reception, we must confess, had been</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So great a throng of ladies as here together seen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And many a fair encounter took place amid the train</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of praise-deserving heroes, (they could not well refrain)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the fair Kriemhilda, until the ship they reach.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then from their palfreys lift they, the well-dight ladies each.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king had now cross'd over, and many a guest of worth.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hey! what stout shafts were shiver'd for these fair ladies' mirth!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One heard the hurthng tumult, as lance on buckler rang.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay, and the rich shield-bosses that in the press did clang!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The fair ones now were standing the landing-place upon;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all his guests had Gunther up from the vessel gone;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He led the Lady Brunhild with his own royal hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then shone against each other bright gems and garments grand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With courtly grace Dame Kriemhild did thereupon repair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To where the Lady Brunhild and all her courtiers were.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw them push their chaplets with their white fingers by,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What time they kissed each other: 'twas done in courtesy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the maid Kriemhilda, and fittingly spake she:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"To us in this our country right welcome may you be;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To me, and to my mother, as unto ev'ry friend</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom we as faithful reckon." Then each did lowly bend.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The dames each other greeted with clasp of hand and arm,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No one had ever heard of a welcoming so warm.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as the two ladies the bride for certain wist,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dame Ute and her daughter her sweet mouth often kiss'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When all Brunhilda's ladies had lighted on the strand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They tenderly were greeted, and taken by the hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For many a well-dight woman there was a warrior good;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many beauteous maidens with Dame Brunhilda stood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before their greeting ended a good long hour had sped;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay, and the lips, like roses, were kiss'd of many a maid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Still stood by one another those two kings' daughters bright,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To many a valiant hero they were a lovely sight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With their own eyes beheld they, who often told had been</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That no such peerless beauty had ever yet been seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As that of these two ladies: it now was plain to view;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw, too, on their bodies naught in the least untrue.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Those who could judge of women and on fair forms decide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Did laud and praise for beauty the royal Gunther's bride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But others—they were wise men with more discerning eyes—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Said, that from Dame Brunhilda Kriemhilda won the prize.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now dame and maid were walking, each other opposite,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a lovely body one saw right nobly dight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a rich pavilion and silken tent were there:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The plain that Worms surrounded was crowded everywhere.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The kinsmen of King Gunther came thronging thereunto.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brunhilda and Kriemhilda were thither bade to go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And take with them their ladies,—where they in shade could stand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There, with them, came the nobles of the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile upon their chargers the guests were all a-field,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a doughty lance-thrust was caught upon the shield.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The plain with dust was smoking,—as though the very earth</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In flames would soon be bursting: now heroes show'd their worth.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon these knightly doings looked many a maiden's eye.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I doubt not that Sir Siegfried full many a time rode by</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The tents, as with his liegemen he back and forward sped.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand gallant warriors from Nibelung he led.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen, lord of Tronje, at his host's bidding went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And courteously the hero did close the tournament,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest by the dust besprinkled the beauteous maids should be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This order by the guests was obey'd good-humouredly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the noble Gernot: " Let now the horses rest.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as it grows cooler we knights will do our best</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To please these lovely ladies, before the palace wide.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let everyone be ready whene'er the king will ride."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When all the wide field over the tournament was stayed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For pastime went the heroes beneath the tall tents' shade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To parley with the ladies,—on mirth and pleasure bent:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus, till 'twas time for riding, their leisure hours were spent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But when it grew towards even and near the sun's last ray—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing the air was cooler—they would no more delay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then many a knight and lady toward the castle rode.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On many a beauteous woman were loving looks bestow'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And now they raced for raiment such as good knights do wear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These highly-mettled warriors,—as was the custom there,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until they reach'd the palace; there did the king dismount,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And they the ladies aided as gallant knights be wont.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now, too, the royal ladies did from each other part.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Queen Ute and her daughter together did depart,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all their court-attendants, unto a chamber wide.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then shouts of joy and laughter were heard on ev'ry side.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The seats being set in order, the royal Gunther would</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Go with his guests to supper; 'twas seen how by him stood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The beautiful Brunhilda; and now a crown she wore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As queen in her king's kingdom;— well worth was she therefore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Fine seats were set for many, by tables broad and good—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As we have been assured—laid with abundant food.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all that they could wish for how little lack was seen 1</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with the king was many a guest of lordly mien.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The host's own body-servants, in ewers of red gold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Did fetch and carry water. If you should e'er be told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That at a prince's wedding the service was more fit,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'T would trouble me but little,—I'd put no faith in it!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Before the great Rhine ruler did of the water take,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Siegfried went unto him a due request to make:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To warn him of his promise, which he, by his right hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Pledged, ere he saw Brunhilda at home in Isenland.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " You must remember, you swore by your right hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If ever Dame Brunhilda should come to this your land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You'd give to me your sister; now what hath got your oath?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Much trouble with your journey I've taken, nothing loth."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to his guest the king said: " Thou didst right well to speak;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What on my hand I swore you, that oath I will not break.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As best I can, I'll help you to bring about this thing."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was Kriemhilda summon'd to court before the king.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With all her beauteous maidens she came unto the hall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then, from a dais springing, young Giselher did call:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Bid all these other damsels return, for verily</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No other than my sister here with the king shall be.'</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They brought the Lady Kriemhild to where the king did stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With noble knights around him from many a prince's land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In the wide hall they bade her stand quietly alone;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile the Lady Brunhild had to the banquet gone.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon did speak King Gunther: " Dear sister, noble maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trust unto thy goodness to let mine oath be paid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I've pledged thee to a warrior; should he become thy lord.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By thy true faith and duty thou wilt have kept my word! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the noble maiden: "Beloved brother mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou shouldst not thus beseech me; my will is ever thine</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To do as thou commandest; what thou hast will'd, shall be:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll take, my lord, for husband, him whom thou giv'st to me."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>At her dear eyes' kind glances all red grew Siegfried's face;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At Dame Kriemhilda's service the knight himself did place.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They twain then must together within the circle stand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They asked if she were wiUing to take this hero's hand? ~</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A little was she shamed with maiden modesty;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But yet, so blest was Siegfried and eke so lucky he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she did not refuse him at once and out of hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wife he swore to take her, that king of Netherland.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So he to her was plighted, and unto him the maid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now the loving damsel no longer was afraid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Within the arms of Siegfried in sweet embrace to rest.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then, before the heroes, his beauteous queen he kiss'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The crowd in twain divided; and, soon as this was done,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lo, there was Siegfried seated upon the second throne</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, by his side, Kriemhilda; many on them did wait;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw the Niblungs thronging around where Siegfried sate.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king was likewise seated, with Brunhilda the maid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But when she saw Kriemhilda (she ne'er had been so sad!)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By noble Siegfried sitting, a-weeping she began:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her many hot tears falling adown her bright cheeks ran.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the country's ruler: " What ails you, lady mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you should dim with weeping those bright and shining eyne?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You rather should be joyful that subject unto you</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My land is, and my castles, and many a bold man, too."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Good cause have I for weeping," replied the beauteous maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"In sooth about thy sister my very heart is sad;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I see her sitting next to yon vassal of thine own:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Needs must I ever mourn it if she be thus undone."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther whisper'd to her: " I prithee, silent be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At some more fitting season I'll tell this tale to thee.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And wherefore unto Siegfried I did my sister give;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In sooth she, with this warrior, right happily may live."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She said: " I aye must pity her beauty and her grace;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And gladly would I hide me,—did I but know a place,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That it might ne'er befall me to lay me by your side;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unless thou tell'st me wherefore she must be Siegfried's bride."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The noble king said to her: " This much then understand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He hath as many castles as I, and broader land,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That know now of a surety; a mighty king is he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And therefore this fair maiden gave I his wife to be."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whate'er the king said to her, she troubled was in mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now hastened from the tables full many a warrior good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So lusty was their tilting, it made the fortress ring ;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host amid his guests was distraught and wearying.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He thought how sweet would rest be, by that fair woman's side!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His heart was never free from this longing for his bride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He from her wifely duties much love must surely win:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then tenderly Brunhilda to eye did he begin.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The guests of knightly pastimes were bid to make an end;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king unto his chamber would with his spouse ascend.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the great hall-stairway Kriemhild and Brunhild met:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They look'd upon each other with nought but kindness yet.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then came their court-attendants; there was no lingering;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The chamberlains rich-suited the taper-lights did bring.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors were divided,—to either king his men:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas plainly seen how many did follow Siegfried then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>U nto their wedding chambers thus both the heroes came.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And each of them was thinking how he by love would tame</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His lovely lady's scruples, and tender was his mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Siegfried was his pastime beyond all measure good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For when the lordly hero held Kriemhild to his heart,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And comforted the maiden with every loving art.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Amid his noble wooing she seem'd his very life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Not for a thousand others had he foregone his wife.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of how he woo'd his lady I nothing more will tell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But hearken to this story, to Gunther what befell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Along with Dame Brunhilda. Methinks the comely thane,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On many a softer pillow with other dames had lain!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The serving-folk had vanish'd, women as well as men:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The door of the bride-chamber was quickly closed then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He thought he should be clasping her sweet form presently,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The time was still far distant when she his wife would be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In shift of snow-white linen she came unto the bed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then thought the noble warrior: " Now have I compassed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All that I ever yearn'd for, through all my livelong days! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her beauty had bewitch'd him,—'twere no unlikely case.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The noble king did firstly quench with his hand the light.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To where the dame was lying then ventured that bold knight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He stretch'd himself beside her: his joy could not be told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As in his arms the hero the lovely one did fold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All loving customs was he right ready to fulfil,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If but the noble lady had let him have his will.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But she so full of wrath was that sorry was his state:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He thought to meet with kindness, and found unfriendly hate.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake: " O knight most noble, you best had let me be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For that which might content you you ne'er will get from me!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I will remain a maiden—you may be sure of that—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until I learn the story." That made her Gunther hate.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He tried to wring love from her, and, striving, tore her dress.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereat she seized a girdle,—this masterful princess;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It was a cord well-twisted, which round the hips she wore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the king full measure she gave of anguish sore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His feet and hands together she fasten'd therewithal;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to a nail she bore him, and hung him on the wall!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Because her sleep he hinder'd, to him she love forbad:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her strength, in sooth, was such that his death he well-nigh had.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then fell he to beseeching, who master should have been:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Loose now my bonds, I pray you, most good and noble queen!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll take an oath, fair lady, you never to constrain;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And never will I lay me so nigh to you again."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She little reck'd how fared he, so she but softly lay:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He needs must stay there hanging all night until the day,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the light of morning athwart the lattice shone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If e'er of strength he boasted, that strength was well-nigh gone.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now say to me Lord Gunther, would you not be afraid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To be found tied and hanging," question'd the beauteous maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"By your own body-servants?—bound by a woman, too? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble knight made answer: " 'Twould evil bode for you!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I, too, should win small honour," the worthy man did say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I pray you of your goodness to let me by you stay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And since it seems my wooing doth anger you so much,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twill long be ere my fingers shall dare your robe to touch! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then speedily she loosed him, and let him to his feet.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Again into the bride-bed he to his wife did get;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet so far did he lay him, that he her raiment fair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thenceforth could scarcely ruffle—of that she took good care.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In came then their attendants, and brought them fresh array,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of which a mighty store was all ready for that day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How gay soe'er the world was, right gloomy had he grown,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The country's noble ruler, who wore, by day, a crown!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>According to old custom, which rightly men obey,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther and Queen Brunhild no longer must delay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To go unto the minster, where Holy Mass was sung.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There, likewise, came Sir Siegfried, and mighty was the throng.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As kingly rank demanded, in readiness did wait</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever they had need of: their crowns and robes of state.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then were they consecrated; and, after that was done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All four were seen in gladness to stand, each with a crown.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then many youths were knighted—six hundred, maybe more—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In honour of the crowning;— of that ye may be sure;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And great rejoicing was there throughout Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One heard the lances splinter in every new knight's hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The fair maids in the windows sat, and o'erlook'd the field:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They saw below them flashing full many a polish'd shield.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther kept aloof from his lieges' revelry,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whate'er the rest were doing, a mournful man was he:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>How great was the unlikeness of his and Siegfried's mood!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And well he knew what ailed him that noble knight and good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the king he hastened, and straight to question fell:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"How fared you yestereven? to me you this should tell."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then to his guest the host spake: " A foul disgrace 'twill be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I've brought the very devil home to the house with me!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For when I sought to woo her, she bound me tight withal,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to a nail she bore me and hang'd me on the wall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"There hung I in mine anguish all night until the day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before she would unbind me. How softly, too, she lay!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This, trusting in your friendship, I tell you secretly."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then cried the stalwart Siegfried: " This grieves me, verily;</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I'll see if I can help you, so put your grief away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll manage that this evening she'll let you by her stay;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She shall not even flout you, nor scorn your love again."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This saying was to Gunther sweet comfort after pain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And further spake Sir Siegfried: "Thou yet mayst prosper well.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right different, I ween, was the luck that us befell!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To me your sister Kriemhild is dearer than my life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This same night Dame Brunhilda shall be your willing wife."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He said: " Unto your chamber I'll come this very night,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Clad in my hood of darkness, unseen of any wight,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ne'er another person my artifice may know;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So let your chamber-servants unto their hostel go.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The lights the pages carry I'll suddenly put out;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And this will be the token, that you may have no doubt</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But I am nigh to aid you: yea! I will tame your wife</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you this night can woo her;— thereon I stake my life! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Then," quoth the king, " be careful thou yieldest not to love;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She is mine own dear lady! The rest I do approve,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Do with her what thou choosest;— if thou shouldst take her life</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Methinks I would o'erlook it: she is a fearsome wife! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I do agree," cried Siegfried, "and, by my faith, I swear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I will not seek to woo her. Is not thy sister dear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before all other women I have set eyes on aye? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right well believed Gunther what Siegfried then did say.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The merry games brought gladness and also weariness.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The tilting and the shouting were bidden soon to cease:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For to the hall the ladies were shortly to depart.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The chamberlains commanded the folk to stand apart.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The horses and the people were driven from the court.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Each of the beauteous ladies a bishop did escort,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>AVhen they in kingly presence must go to sit at meat.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a goodly liegeman them follow'd to their seat.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king, with hopes encouraged, in joyous humour sat:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What Siegfried had assured him, his mind was full of that!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him this one day seemed as long as thirty days.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon his lady's wooing his thoughts were set always.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He scarcely could content him until the meal was done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was the fair Brunhilda at leisure to be gone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As also was Kriemhilda; both to their rooms would go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The thanes around them thronging;—ha! 'twas a gallant show!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Siegfried by Kriemhilda his beauteous wife still sate,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with her held sweet converse with joy unmarr'd by hate.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His hands she softly fondled with hers that were so white,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until—but how she knew not—he vanish'd from her sight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As she with him was toying and found he'd slipped away,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She turned to his attendants, and thus the queen did say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I marvel what hath happen'd the king, where hath he gone?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His hands he but this moment hath taken from mine own."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She did not question further. Meanwhile he quickly came</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To where the chamber-servants did wait with links aflame:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He straight began to quench them, each in the page's hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That it was done by Siegfried Gunther did understand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Well knew he what he wanted: he therefore bade begone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The maids and dames who waited. As soon as this was done</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble king was careful himself to lock the door:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Two strong bolts drew he quickly and fastened therebefore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Behind the tester-hangings he hid the tapers' light.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then began a play-piece, which ended not that night,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Betwixt the stalwart Siegfried and that fair maiden wife;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which was unto King Gunther with joy and sorrow rife.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When on the couch lay Siegfried alongside of the queen:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Take care," quoth she, " Lord Gunther,—though sweet it might have been</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To love me—lest you suffer as you have done before."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lady for bold Siegfried had bitter woe in store.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To hide his voice he fail'd not, and ne'er a word spake he.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so 'twas plain to Gunther, although he could not see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That nothing sly or secret was passing 'twixt the twain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But little peace or comfort did either of them gain!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He bore himself as though he the great King Gunther were,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in his arms clasp'd closely that maiden passing fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But on a bench by-standing she hurl'd him from the bed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So that against a footstool he loudly smote his head.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Arising, strong as ever, up leapt the gallant man:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This time he would do better! but soon as he began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To try and overpower her, again she wrought him woe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne'er wife hath made a fending the like of that, I trow!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And when he gave not over, the maiden sprang upright:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Full ill doth it beseem you to touch my shift so white!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Coarse are you and unmanner'd: woe therefore you betide!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You shall not soon forget it!" the comely maiden cried.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She clasp'd the good knight tightly with both her arms around,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And would have laid and bound him, as she the king had bound,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she in peace and quiet might lie upon her bed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The ruffling of her raiment she vengefully repaid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>What did his valour serve him, and what his power of limb,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When she essayed to show him that she could master him?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By might and main she bore him—not elsewise could it be—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And 'twixt the bed and cupboard she crush'd him cruelly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Ah, woe is me! " the knight thought, " am I to lose my life.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And that through a mere maiden? if so be, every wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From this day forth for ever, with arrogance and pride</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Will treat her lawful husband; which else should ne'er betide."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king could hear all plainly, and grieved for the man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried, full sore ashamed, to rage within began;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His monstrous strength outputting he with the maid did close,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And strove with all his forces Dame Brunhild to oppose.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Long time it seemed to Gunther ere he the maid did quell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She grasp'd his hands so tightly, that from each finger-nail</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The blood burst from her pressure;— sad pain the hero bore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere yet the noble maiden he made for evermore</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Renounce that will unruly, of which she was so proud.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king heard what was passing, but durst not speak a word.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Against the bed he press'd her, until she cried again:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His strength it was sufficient to cause her gruesome pain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then clutch'd she at the girdle she wore about her waist.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And would have bound him with it: he stopp'd it with such haste</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And force, that all her body and joints crack'd in the strife.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus ended was the battle,—she now was Gunther's wife.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake: "O noble sovran, now let my life go free,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all shall be atoned for that I have done to thee.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne'er more I'll do despite to the love of thy true heart:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right surely have I proved that thou women's master art."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Siegfried stepp'd aside then—whilst there the maiden lay—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As though he had bethought him his clothes to put away;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But first, from off her finger a golden ring he drew,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So that the noble maiden naught of it ever knew.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He likewise took her girdle,—a silken cord and good,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I know not if he took it in arrogance of mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his wife he gave it, whence woe he one day had.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then lay each by the other the king and his fair maid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He woo'd her as a lover, as was his right to do.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And needs must she her anger and eke her shame forego.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So closely did he court her her cheeks grew somewhat pale:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ah me! how all her power was made by love to fail!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For now she was no stronger than any other dame,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all her lovely body his very own became.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If she had tried to spurn him, what profit could it prove?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This was the work of Gunther by virtue of his love.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>How full of fond endearments he by the lady lay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In tender love and kindness until the dawn of day!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile, the noble Siegfried had gone again outside,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And was right warmly welcomed by his own winsome bride.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He put aside the questions which did perplex her thought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And long from her kept hidden what he for her had brought;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until, a queen and crowned, to his own land she went.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What he was doom'd to give her he nowise could prevent!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The host upon the morrow was in a gayer mood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than on the former morning; thereby a humour good</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Spread through his lands, rejoicing full many a noble thane</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom to his house he summon'd, and well did entertain,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The merry-making lasted until the fourteenth day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all the while the turmoil did not abate nor stay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all kinds of rejoicing, which one and all must share.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas all at the king's charges, and great in sooth they were.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For noble Gunther's kinsmen, as them the king had told,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gave gifts to do him honour, of raiment and red gold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of horses and of silver, unto the outland men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They who for gifts were eager departed happy then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And even the lord Siegfried from out of Netherland,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all his thousand lieges, of that apparel grand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which they had brought to Rhineland to them did freely give;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fine horses, eke, and saddles: right nobly could they live!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ere all the costly presents were shared among the throng,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those who would fain go homeward began to think it long.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne'er yet of like enjoyment had guests so had their fill.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so the wedding ended, such was King Gunther's will.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
