<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 38</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-38" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXXVIII.— HOW LORD DIETRICH'S WARRIORS ALL WERE SLAIN</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So great a sound of mourning on every side was heard,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From palace walls and turrets the echoes all were stirr'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By one of Dietrich's liegemen of Bern 'twas heard as well;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How swiftly then he started the direful news to tell.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the prince then spake he: " Hearken, my Lord Dietrich,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As long as I've been living, ne'er have I heard the like</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of such unearthly wailing as I have heard but now:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Some harm unto King Etzel himself hath come, I trow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"How else would all the people be in distress so dread?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king, or may be Kriemhild, must one of them be dead,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Slain by those daring strangers, who bore them enmity:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many goodly warriors are waiHng bitterly."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake of Bern the hero: " My trusty lieges dear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now be ye not too hasty! what hath befallen here</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was wrought by homeless warriors, by dire distresses driven;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And let them use the freedom that I to them have given."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the gallant Wolfhart: " I will myself be gone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And ask about the matter, what 'tis that they have done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then I will report it to you, my master dear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When yonder I discover what mean the cries we hear,"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon Lord Dietrich answer'd: " When one has wrath to face.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full oft, at ill-timed questions, 'tis found to be the case</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That warriors too swiftly are apt offence to take:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In truth I will not, Wolfhart, that you the quest should make."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon he summon'd Helfrich right speedily to go;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And from the men of Etzel he bade him get to know,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or even from the strangers,—what doings there had been;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For ne'er such great lamenting of people was there seen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The envoy made inquiry: " What hath there here been done? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then answer'd one among them: " Now is for ever gone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All that we had of pleasure in this Hungarian land!—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Here Riideger lies slaughter'd by the Burgundians' hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Of those who enter'd with him not one came out again."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then verily to Helfrich ne'er could be greater pain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In sooth he ne'er had carried news so unwillingly;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The messenger to Dietrich went weeping bitterly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"What hast thou," then said Dietrich, " for us discovered?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And wherefore, warrior Helfrich, thy tears so freely shed? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Good cause have I for weeping," answer'd the noble thane:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Good Riideger is lying by the Burgundians slain." '</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The knight of Bern made answer: " God grant that may not be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That were a fearful vengeance, and foul fiend's pleasantry:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howe'er were such requital deserved by Riideger?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For well am I persuaded he held the strangers dear."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereto made Wolf hart answer: " If they this deed have done</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It verily shall cost them the life of everyone!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To us 'twould be disgraceful if this we were to stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For Riideger has served us right often with his hand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But Amelung's chieftain bade them better informed to be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile within his window right mournfully sat he;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Hildebrand enjoin'd he unto the guests to go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he whate'er had happen'd from them might surely know.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>That warrior bold in battle, the ancient Hildebrand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor shield nor any weapon took with him in his hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He to the guests was going in courtesy alone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But sore were the upbraidings made by his sister's son.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For spake the fiery Wolf hart: " Wilt thou so simply go?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then certes some misusage thou wilt not fail to know!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So, full of grief and trouble, thou needs must homeward fare:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But if thou takest thy weapons they each will have a care."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the ancient gird him e'en as the stripling bade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But lo! before he knew it, in fighting gear array'd,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were standing Dietrich's warriors, with drawn sword everyone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This thing the hero liked not, and gladly had forgone.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He asked where they were going. " Along with you we'll fare!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Perchance Hagen of Tronje so much the less may dare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With mocking speech to meet you,—which well he knows to use."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When that he heard, the warrior no longer could refuse.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The gallant Volker saw them in armour fully dight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those knights of Bern come marching, all Dietrich's men of might;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their swords were girt upon them, they carried shield in hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his lords he told it of the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the fiddle-player: " Yonder I see them go,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The followers of Dietrich,—in semblance of a foe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With weapons and in helmets: us mean they to withstand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow for us poor exiles misfortune is at hand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>E'en at the self-same moment came Hildebrand to him,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And at his feet his buckler he set upon its rim.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The followers of Gunther to question then he sought:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Alas! what harm, good heroes, to you hath Riideger wrought?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Me hath my master Dietrich sent unto you to say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>' If any one among you hath by his hand this day</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Laid low the noble margrave,—as we are told by some,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>An injury so grievous we ne'er could overcome.' "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen spake of Tronj: "No lie the tidings are;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though fain I were to grant you, for love of Riideger,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they had lied who told you, and he were still in life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He must be ever wept for by man and maid and wife."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When all knew, of a surety, that Riideger was dead.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors bewail'd him, as love and fealty bade.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From each of Dietrich's liegemen one saw the tears-drops fall</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>O'er chin and beard descending: sore was the grief of all.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Siegestab outspeaking,—the duke from Bern,—said he:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Forever now is ended the hospitality</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Riideger aye show'd us after our days of pain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The Comfort of the exile lies by you heroes slain."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then from among the Amelungs, the warrior Wolfwin said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Were I this day before me to see my father dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ne'er could I feel more sorrow than at this stricken life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alas! who now will comfort the worthy margrave's wife? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon in mood of anger the thane Sir Wolf hart cried:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Who on so many a foray shall now the warriors guide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As heretofore the margrave hath times right often done?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alas, most noble Riideger, that thou from us art gone! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There Helferich and Wolfbrand and Helmot also were,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all their friends, bewailing the death of Riideger;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Hildebrand for sobbing could ask no more of aught.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: "Now do ye, warriors, that which my lord hath sought,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Give Riideger's dead body to us from out the hall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With whom, in very sorrow, our joys are ended all;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And let us now requite him for all that he hath done</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For us, in faithful friendship, and many another one.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"We also here are strangers, Hke the thane Riideger,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Why do ye keep us waiting? Let us his body bear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Away, to him our servite e'en after death to give:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Far rather had we done it, whilst he were yet alive! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"No service is so worthy," then the King Gunther spake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"As that for a dead comrade a friend doth undertake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And steadfast faith I call it, where'er the same I find.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ye pay him honour rightly, to you he hath been kind."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"How long must we be pleading? " Wolfhart the warrior said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Since our best Consolation by you is stricken dead.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And we, alas! no longer the good thereof may have.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So let us take the chieftain and lay him in his grave."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereto made answer Volker: " He shall be given by none!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Come to the hall and take him, here where the thane, fordone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With deadly wounds disfigured, lies in the bloody pool:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That were to do your duty to Riideger in full."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon bold Wolfhart answer'd: " Sir Minstrel, God doth know</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No need have ye to taunt us, ye've done us harm enow.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Durst I offend my master, you'd be the worse for this,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But we must pass it over, since strife forbidden us is."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the fiddle-player: " Fear claims too much, I trow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When all that is forbidden a man must needs forego;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By me that were not reckon'd a right good hero's mood! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The speech of his companion seemed unto Hagen good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"That shall not serve your purpose," Wolfhart in answer spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll so untune your fiddle that you a tale may take,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Along with you, when homewards unto the Rhine you ride;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I cannot brook with honour your overweening pride."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the fiddle-player: "If thou a fiddlestring</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of mine untuneful makest, thy helmet's glittering</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must speedily be lessen'd and clouded by my hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howe'er betide my riding to the Burgundian land."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He would have sprung upon him, if he had not been stay'd</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By Hildebrand his uncle, who hands upon him laid:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In this thy senseless anger thou wouldst, I trow, go mad,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so my master's favour might'st never moue have had."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Let go the lion, master! fierce though he be of mood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Comes he into my clutches," said Volker, warrior good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"E'en though a world of people he with his hands hath slain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll kill him, that the story he ne'er may tell again."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By this was sorely quicken'd the Berners' angry mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Wolfhart clutch'd his buckler, a ready knight and good:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E'en Hke a savage lion in front of them he rush'd,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whilst following close behind him his friends the onset push'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Yet though he sprang so swiftly, to reach the palace wall</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He could not on the stairway old Hildebrand forestall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who would not that another first in the fight should be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their guerdon from the strangers they both got presently.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then quickly upon Hagen sprang Master Hildebrand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The clashing of the sword-blades was heard on either hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their wrath was sorely kindled, as presently was plain;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A fiery stream was scatter'd from ofi" their weapons twain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Yet quickly were they sunder'd under the stress of fight:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men of Bern so caused it, prevailing in their might.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereon away from Hagen betook him Hildebrand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And needs must gallant Volker stout Wolfhart's onset stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He smote the fiddle-player upon his helmet good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So bravely that the sword-edge unto the sidebands hew'd;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fiddler bold repaid him with all his might and main,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And laid his blows on Wolfhart, until he reel'd again.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They struck from the mail-armour of fiery sparks enow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their hate for one another was felt in every blow;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then came the warrior Wolf win of Bern the twain between:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had he not been a hero that never could have been.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warrior Gunther also gave with unstinting hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A welcome to the heroes far-famed of Amelung land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Giselher the lordly made helms that shone before,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On head of many a warrior, ruddy and wet with gore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And Dankwart, Hagen's brother, a fearsome man was he:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whatever he, already, on Etzel's chivalry</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In battle had accomplish'd, e'en as the wind was naught:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The son of the bold Aldrian now like a madman fought.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Richart and Gerbart likewise, Helfrich and eke Wichart,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who oftentimes in battle right well had play'd their part,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now plainly show'd their prowess to Gunther's fighting men;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wolf brand in combat proudly was seen to bear him then,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And like a madman raging fought ancient Hildebrand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many a doughty warrior then fell by Wolf hart's hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Death-stricken by his sword-blows, into the pool of blood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus Riideger avenged they, these gallant knights and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then fought the noble Siegstab as of his might was due;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ha! and upon his foemen what goodly helmets too</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were shiver'd in the battle by Dietrich's sister's son;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He could not in the struggle e'er better work have done.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon the sturdy Volker, as soon as he beheld</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How from the tough mail-armour the blood in streamlets well'd</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At gallant Siegstab's sword-strokes, the hero's wrath arose;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Forward he sprang to meet him: and so his life to lose</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the spot had Siegstab through that same fiddle-man;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who forthwith of his cunning to give such proof began</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That by his mighty weapon quick death must needs ensue.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Old Hildebrand avenged him, as of his strength was due.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Woe, for my lord beloved!" cried Master Hildebrand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Who here in death is lying stricken by Volker's hand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Henceforth this fiddle-player shall save himself no more! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bold Hildebrand was wrathful as ne'er he was before.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then smote he so at Volker, that far to either wall</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The bands and clasps in pieces were strown about the hafl,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From helm and eke from buckler of that same minstrel bold:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so of sturdy Volker the ending there was told.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The liegemen then of Dietrich came thronging to the rout;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They smote till from the hauberks the links flew far about,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And splinter'd weapons saw one as high in air they flew;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hot flowing blood in streamlets from out the helms they drew.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When Hagen, lord of Tronj, saw Volker lying slain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>More grievous was his sorrow than all the other pain</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That in this high foregathering he had for man or kin.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What vengeance for the hero did Hagen then begin!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"It shall not long advantage the old man Hildebrand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That yonder lies my helpmate slain by the hero's hand,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The veriest good comrade that ever yet I had! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He raised his shield, and forward he rush'd with hewing blade.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile the stalwart Helfrich had stricken Dankwart low.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Giselher and Gunther grievous it was enow</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When in the stress of battle they saw him fall beneath:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With his own hands already he had avenged his death.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now all this while did Wolfhart stride up and down again,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with his sword unresting he hew'd at Gunther's men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A third time he the journey had made along the hall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many were the warriors doom'd by his hand to fall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Giselher the lordly to Wolfhart loudly spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Woe! that so fierce a foeman 'twas e'er my luck to make!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>O noble knight and gallant, now turn thyself to me,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll do my best to end it: it may no longer be."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To Giselher, in fighting, then Wolfhart turn'd him round,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And each upon the other made many a gaping wound:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With such a mighty onset against the king he dash'd,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The blood beneath his footsteps above his head was splash'd.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With swift and deadly sword-strokes the son of Ute fair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gave greeting unto Wolfhart, the gallant hero, there.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How strong the thane soever, he was not to be saved:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So young a king could never more boldly have behaved.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He struck a blow at Wolfhart, cleaving the hauberk good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And over him and downwards, gush'd from the wound the blood •</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the death he wounded that man of Dietrich's own;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>None but a very warrior to do the like had known.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as gallant Wolfhart was of the wound aware,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He let his shield slip downwards; but higher in the air</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A weapon strong he wielded: it was a keen one too;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherewith through helm and hauberk the hero Giselher slew.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So had they one another to cruel death fordone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then of Dietrich's lieges there lived but one alone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When Hildebrand the ancient beheld how Wolfhart fell,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow, until his ending, such grief he ne'er could tell.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The men-at-arms of Gunther were dead now everyone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As likewise those of Dietrich; and Hildebrand had gone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the place where Wolfhart was lying in the blood:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Within his arms he folded that warrior brave and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Fain would he from the chamber have borne him bodily,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But he was all too weighty, he e'en must let him lie.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The dying man uplifted his eyes amid the blood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And saw well that his kinsman would help him if he could.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"My well-beloved uncle," the dying one then said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"At this time it avails not to give me any aid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now ware you well of Hagen! ay, take my words for good;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For in his heart he nurses an ever cruel mood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If after death my kinsfolk for me should mourning be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto my next and dearest I bid you say for me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they for me must weep not: need for it is there none,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Here lie I slain in honour, by kingly hands fordone.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"So throughly here, moreover, have I avenged my life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That cause indeed for wailing hath many a good knight's wife;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If anyone should ask you so may you answer plain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A good five score are lying whom I myself have slain."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile had Hagen likewise upon the minstrel thought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom Hildebrand the valiant unto his end had brought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake he to the warrior: " My loss thou shalt requite,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For here thou hast bereft us of many a goodly knight."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He struck a blow at Hildebrand, such that one might have told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hissing sound of Balmung, the sword that Hagen bold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From Siegfried's self had taken when he that hero slew;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The blow the old man parried: ay! he was valiant too.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warrior of Dietrich against the Tronian knight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His weapon broad uplifted, that keenly too could smite.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To wound the man of Gunther yet might he not prevail.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then once again smote Hagen through well-wrought coat of mail.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now when the old Sir Hildebrand was of the wound aware.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>More evil yet he dreaded from Hagen's hand to bear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His shield the man of Dietrich threw back behind his head,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, desperately wounded, the chief from Hagen fled.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of all the knightly warriors remain'd there but a pair,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Save Gunther's self and Hagen none others living were.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Old Hildebrand all bleeding in flight had safety sought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And when he came to Dietrich a woeful tale he brought.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He saw his master sitting with visage woe-begone,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The prince was yet more sorry when he his tale had done;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the bloody hauberk of Hildebrand look'd he.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And sought of him his tidings in all anxiety.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now tell me, Master Hildebrand, why are ye in this state,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And reeking with your life-blood? or who hath done you that?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween that in the palace you with the guests have fought:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So strictly I forbade it that ye in nowise ought."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his lord he answer'd: " 'Twas Hagen did it all!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He set on me and gave me this wound within the hall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E'en as I from the warrior to turn myself began.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And hither from that devil barely with life I ran! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then he of Bern made answer: " Ye are but served aright!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing that ye had heard me swear friendship with the knight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then ye break the peace-pledge granted to him by me:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Would it not ever shame me your life should forfeit be."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now be ye not so wrathful, my good Lord Dietrich, pray!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On me and on my kinsfolk the loss too hard doth weigh.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We purposed from the palace to carry Riideger;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To grant it all unwilling King Gunther's liegemen were."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now woe upon such tidings! is Riideger then dead?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This is the greatest sorrow that e'er I suffered.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble Gotelinda is child of aunt of mine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay! woe for the poor orphans who at Bechlaren pine."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His death weigh'd sorely on him, with ruth and sorrow great.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He fell to bitter weeping; sad was the hero's strait:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Woe for my trusty helpmate who now is lost to me!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay! of King Etzel's liegeman the like I ne'er shall see.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now must ye, Master Hildebrand, tell me the story true.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which of the warriors was it who him so foully slew? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That did the stalwart Gernot by strength of arm," he said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"By Riideger's hand the hero is also lying dead."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To Hildebrand then spake he: "Now let my liegemen know</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they must straightway arm them, for thither will I go;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bid them bring me hither my shirt of shining mail.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From the Burgundian heroes myself I'll have the tale."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hildebrand made answer: "Who shall now go with thee?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>None others hast thou living but what thou here dost see;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I am thine only liegeman; the others all are dead."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He shudder'd at these tidings—in sooth, there was good need,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For never such great sorrow he in this world had known.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " And if my liegemen are truly dead and gone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then am I God-forsaken, I, Dietrich, wretched wight!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erewhile a noble sovran and full of power and might."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"How could such thing have happened? " spake Dietrich once again,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"These far-renowndd heroes,—that all of them are slain</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By men with fighting weary, in sore necessity!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But for mine evil fortune, death still afar would be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Seeing my doom avails not to ward from me this ill,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now tell me, of the guest-folk are any living still? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Master Hildebrand answer'd: " God knoweth, only twain—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hagen to wit, and Gunther the noble king—remain."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Dear Wolfhart, woe betide me! if thou from me art torn,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Too quickly may I rue me that ever I was born!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Siegestab and Wolfwin, and none the less Wolfbrand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who now shall help my journey back to the Amelungs' land?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Helfrich the ever gallant, and have they laid him low?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Gerebart and Wichart,—how weep for them enow?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of all my joy and pleasure the ending is this day:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fain would I die for sorrow—alas that no man may! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
