<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure IV.— HOW SIEGFRIED FOUGHT THE SAXONS</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And now, behold, strange tidings have come to Gunther's land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And heralds from a distance arrive at the command</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of warriors unheard of and yet who hatred bore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And when the three kings heard it their grief, in sooth, was sore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>These warriors' names I'll tell you: the first was Lud'ger hight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Out of the Saxon country, a rich king of great might;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Ludegast came with him, who was of Denmark king;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These twain brought many with them, a princely following.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To Gunther's land the heralds their ready steps had bent,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom those kings, his opponents, had with their message sent.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The unknown men were questioned as to the news they brought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, summoned by King Gunther, the royal presence sought.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king did greet them fairly; " Be welcome here," quoth he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Though who hath sent you hither is yet unknown to me:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That must I hear now of you," declared the monarch good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Exceedingly they feared King Gunther's angry mood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" If thou, O king, allowest, the message we'll reveal</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which we are sent to bring thee, and nothing will conceal.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We'll name to you the masters who've sent us to this strand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lud'gast and Lud'ger, namely, who would invade your land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Ye have incurred their anger, nor shun we here to state</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That both our masters harbour for you the greatest hate.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They mean to come with armies to Worms upon the Rhine:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many warriors aid them;— so warn we thee and thine.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Within twelve weeks their journey must here accomplished be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If you've good friends to help you, you'll seek them speedily</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To guard your land and castles, and fight in battlefield.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By them will here be cloven full many a helm and shield.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Or, if ye will treat with them, so make your offer: then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They will not bring upon you their hosts of armd men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All bitter foes unto you, to work you grievous woe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Destroying your fair knighthood with many a deadly blow."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Now tarry here a little," replied the monarch good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Until I have bethought me,—then shall ye learn my mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If I have faithful subjects I must not hide this thing;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This grievous errand must I unto my lieges bring."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Rich as he was, to Gunther it was a trouble sore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Within his heart the matter he pondered o'er and o'er.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He sent in quest of Hagen, and others of his men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bade them from the palace to fetch King Gemot then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His worthiest came unto him, all that were found to hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " The foeman cometh here into this our land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bringing a mighty army; to work you all much woe."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To which the bold knight Gemot made answer: " Nay, not so,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Our good swords shall defend us!" undaunted Gemot said;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" None but the doomed die, ever,—and they're as good as dead!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For fear of death, I'll never forget mine honour dear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let the foe come, and welcome! they'll find us ready here!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen spake, of Tronjd: " The thing doth bode no good;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lud'gast and Lud'ger both are too arrogant of mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The time's too short to gather, and furnish all our men;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ye must advise with Siegfried." Thus spake the bold Hagen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They bade men take the heralds, and lodge them in the town.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>However hostile to them, for sake of his renown</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gunther would have them cared for, as was their due and right;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until he knew what friends would stand by him in the fight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Yet the king's heart was heavy and sad with anxious care.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But one beheld him mourning,—a gallant knight and fair,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who knew not of the sorrow that had befall'n the king;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore besought he Gunther to declare to him this thing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" To me it is a marvel," quoth Siegfried (for 'twas he),</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" How all your merry custom hath changed utterly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which was the rule among us, and hath so long held sway? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To which, in answer, Gunther, the comely knight did say;</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Not unto every comer would I the grief declare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which close within my bosom in secret I must bear:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One keeps one's deepest sorrow for stedfast friends," he said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At this did Siegfried's colour change quick, 'twixt white and red.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" I never have denied you," he spake unto the king;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" And shall not, in this trouble, my strong arm succour bring?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If you for friends are seeking, lo, am I not your friend?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trust to be so ever,—with honour, till mine end."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Now God reward you, Siegfried, for what you now have said.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And though your strength should never be needed in mine aid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet doth this news rejoice me, that you my friend will be;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And you shall ne'er regret it, if life be granted me.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" And you shall hear the reason wherefore I now am sad:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From enemies, by heralds, this message I have had:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they will, with their armies, assail us, at our door;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The like no warriors ever did in these lands before."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Let not your heart be troubled," quoth Siegfried, thereunto;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" And calm your anxious spirit, and as I pray you, do!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Leave it to me to win you honour and vantage both,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bid your thanes come hither to aid you, nothing loth.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Although your mighty foemen should have at their command</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full thirty thousand swordsmen, yet would I them withstand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though I had but a thousand: so leave this all to me."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"For this," said Gunther, " ever your debtor I shall be."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" So let a thousand warriors at my disposal be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since I of mine own following, have only here with me</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A dozen knights, all reckoned: thus will I guard your land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And faithfully at all times shall serve you Siegfried's hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" In this must Hagen help us, his nephew Ortwein too,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dankwart and Sindold also, all knights beloved of you.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Volker shall ride with us, Volker the gallant man,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A better one I know not, and he shall lead the van.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" And let the heralds ride back home to their masters' land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And that they soon shall see us give them to understand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That peace within our castles may undisturbed reign."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For followers and kinsmen the king then sent amain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The messengers of Lud'ger straightway to court repair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At news of home-returning greatly rejoiced they were.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The good King Gunther gave them rich gifts to take away,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And promised them safe conduct: right glad of heart were they.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Say now," King Gunther bade them, " unto my foes who come,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They'd best forego this journey, and stay content at home.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But, if they be determined to seek me in my land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unless my good friends fail me, they'll find their work to hand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Rich presents then they, straightway, before the heralds bore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gunther was rich in treasure, and had enough and more;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These men of Lud'ger's durst not refuse the offered fee,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And when they leave had taken, departed joyfully.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now when they unto Denmark returned were at last,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And had declared the tidings unto King Ludegast,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which they had brought from Rhineland, and all to him was said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The proud and haughty answer filled him with grief and dread.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They said that by the Rhine dwelt full many a gallant wight:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Among them, with King Gunther, there was a certain knight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who bore the name of Siegfried,—a knight of Netherland."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sore grieved was Lud'gast when he this news did understand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as they of Denmark had heard the news of war,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They made all haste to gather their friends from near and far,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till Ludegast could reckon on twenty-thousand men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All warriors bold, and ready the war-march to begin.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>King Ludeger the Saxon assembled his men, too,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till he had forty thousand or even more to show,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ready to join the others, and ride to Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor was King Gunther idle at home, for also he</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sent word to all his kinsmen, and to his brothers' men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bid their troops assemble to go to battle then;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And likewise Hagen's warriors,—the heroes needed all.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereby must many a chieftain in death, thereafter, fall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So made they all things ready. When perfect was each plan,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The gallant warrior, Volker, was bade to lead the van,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thus they rode together from Worms, upon the Rhine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The chief command to Hagen of Tronje they assign.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With them did ride' Sir Sindold, and eke the brave Hunold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Two knights of whom was either well worth King Gunther's gold;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Dankwart, Hagen's brother, his nephew Ortwein too,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who also might with honour upon the war-march go.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Sir king," said Siegfried, " prithee, in quiet bide at home,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Seeing that all thy warriors with me to battle come,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Remain to guard the women, and aye be of good cheer:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I trow I can take care of your honour and your gear!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" From those who would assail you, at Worms upon the Rhine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I'll see that nought of evil befall or thee or thine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So closely will we press them, and compass them so near.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That all their braggart boasting shall soon be changed to fear."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From Rhine they rode through Hesse, their warriors as well,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Towards the Saxon country,— where they to fighting fell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They ravaged all the borders and spoiled with sword and brand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till fear fell on those princes, who sorrowed for their land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So came they o'er the marches; their followers pressed on,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then the gallant Siegfried began to think thereon:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Who shall defend our camp-folk, now we have brought them here?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>More damage-wreaking raiders to Saxons never were."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Some counselled: "On the march let bold Dankwart guard our youth;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He is a trusty warrior, and swift in act, forsooth:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let him and also Ortwein have conduct of the rear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So shall we have less damage from Lud'ger's men to fear."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Then I myself will ride on," did gallant Siegfried cry.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And keep the foremost outlook, till we the foe espy;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until I find out where these same crafty warriors lurk."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fair Sieglind's son then quickly donned helmet and hauberk.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The rank and file to Hagen he entrusted as he went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And also unto Gemot, the warrior excellent.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then all alone forth rode he into the Saxon-land;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That very day his sword hewed full many a helmet-band.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He saw a whole vast army upon the plain outspread,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By which his own few helpers were far outnumbered:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There were full forty thousand, or even more, maybe;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But when Sir Siegfried saw them, his heart was full of glee 1</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On the foe's side a warrior had to the front been sent,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who on his guard stood ready, watchful and diligent.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hero Siegfried saw him, and the bold man saw him:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And each did watch the other, with jealous hate and grim,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>I'll tell you who it was, who thus sentinel did stand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(A shining shield of red gold was hanging on his hand,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>King Ludegast it was who his army thus did guard,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble guest spurred forward to meet him on the sward.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>King Ludegast had also his enemy espied,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And each sharp spurs had driven into his stallion's side.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With lances on the shields bent each charged with all his might,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Ludegast the mighty was soon in sorry plight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>After the crash, the chargers bore the two princes by,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As if a mighty storm-wind had blown them furiously.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till each, the rein obeying, was turned in knightly way;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the two grim foemen with swords their skill essay.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The mighty strokes of Siegfried made all the field resound,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until King Lud'gast's helmet seemed flaming all around,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fire-red sparks shot upwards beneath the hero's hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Each knight found in his fellow a foeman worth his brand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>King Lud'gast dealt him also right many an ugly blow:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their good shields caught the sword-thrusts, that else had laid them low.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Lud'gast's warriors, thirty were witness of the fray.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But, ere they came to aid him, Siegfried had gained the day.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From three great wounds and ghastly, which to the king he dealt</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Clean through his white, steel harness;— though it was firmly welt,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where the keen sword-point entered burst from his wounds the blood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>King Ludegast might well be thereat of doleful mood!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He begged for life; and offered to pledge to him his land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Telling him that 'twas Lud'gast whose fate was in his hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then uprode his warriors, who witnessed had right well</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What, 'twixt the twain before them, upon the watch, befell.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried now thence would take him; but he was set upon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By thirty of the foemen: yet did he hold his own.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And kept his wealthy captive; and struck out, brave and true,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And gave those stately chieftains much bitter cause to rue.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In self-defence, the thirty he thereupon did slay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One only left he living; who spurred his steed away</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bear the direful tidings of all that there befell:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which eke his bloody helmet did but too plainly tell.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When to the men of Denmark the dreadful news was told,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howthat theirking was taken,—they scarce their grief could hold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And when they told his brother, he fell to rave like mad,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In uncontrolled fury,—so great the grief he had.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So Ludegast the warrior was captive made, and then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Led from the field by Siegfried, and giv'n to Gunther's men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Hagen's care they gave him; and when they heard the truth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That 'twas the king he brought them,—they did not grieve, forsooth!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The banner of Burgundia was fixed its staff unto.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Come on, my men! " cried Siegfried, " here have we more to do.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the day be ended. If God preserve my life,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There'll weep among the Saxons full many a comely wife!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Give ear, ye Rhine-born heroes, unto these words I say:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To Lud'ger's host I, truly, can show ye straight the way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ye'll see some helmet-hewing by heroes' hands, I trow!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, ere we turn us homewards, what grief is some shall know."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To horse did Gemot hasten, as eke did all his men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Aloft upbore the banner the stalwart minstrel-thane,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The high-born noble Volker;— before the host he rode;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke the camp-folk, following, proudly to battle strode.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They had no more, all counted, than just a thousand men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And twelve, with those of Siegfried. The dust 'gan rising then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the streets and roadways, as through the land they rode:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw their lances shining, and many a good shield glowed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now also had the Saxons come forth in great array.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their swords were finely sharpened, as I have heard men say;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And keen they were and deadly, wielded by heroes' hands:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therewith they, from the strangers, would castle guard and lands.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The marshal of the Rhine-men led on his warriors then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Siegfried followed closely, with the twelve valiant men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom he had brought as comrades from out the Netherland.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That day in blood of battle was stained many a hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For Sindold's might, and Hunold's, and Gernot's had laid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In course of that fell combat, full many a hero dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere they had time to reckon the valour of the foe.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a winsome lady that day must weep for woe.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Volker and Sir Hagen, and also Ortewein,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dimmed in that strife the light that from many a helm did shine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With damp of blood downpouring,—these battle-valiant men!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Dankwart's prowess also wrought many a marvel then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And also they of Denmark did well their weapons wield,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a thrust resounded on many a polish'd shield;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And the sharp sword-strokes echoed death-dealing, blow on blow.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warlike Saxons likewise did harm enough, I trow!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As now the bold Burgundians, pressed forward in the fight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By them was many a sword-wound, wide-cleft,—a ghastly sight!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And streaming o'er the saddles, one saw the reeking blood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus fought they for dear honour, those valiant knights and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One heard there, loud-resounding, from every hero's hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The clashing of keen weapons; whilst they of Netherland</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dashed after their bold leader, into the thickest fray.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right valiantly they followed where Siegfried showed the way.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For him the Rhenish heroes could never come anigh;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One might have seen down-flowing red streamlets bloodily</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beneath the glitt'ring helmets, cloven by Siegfried's hand;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until he saw King Lud'ger before his warriors stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Three sev'ral times he'd traversed the host, from end to end,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now, to help him, Hagen his steps did thither bend.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right well in fight assuaged they the fierceness of their mood:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Through them that day must perish full many a warrior good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Wh-en Ludeger the stalwart saw Siegfried near him stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And how aloft he wielded the good sword in his hand,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The mighty weapon Balmung,—and what a host it slew:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king waxed very wrathful, and fierce his anger grew.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then was a mighty thronging, cind clang of swords as well,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As on each side the warriors on their opponents fell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The chieftains sought each other, mettle and strength to gauge;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hosts began to waver; then waxed the hate and rage.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The leader of the Saxons was well aware, I trow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His brother was a captive,—and therefore grieved enow.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He knew too that the captor was Siegelinda's son;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas first set down to Gemot, but soon the truth was known.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So fierce was Lud'ger's onslaught, and eke of such fell force,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That under Siegfried's saddle stagger'd his battle-horse.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But soon it did recover; and, as the turmoil grew,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The aspect of bold Siegfried was terrible to view.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Hagen he had to aid him, and Gemot too was by.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Dankwart and Sir Volker;— the dead around did lie.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There fought the bold thane Ortwein, and Sindold, and Hunold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who, on the field of battle, left many a warrior cold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In combat undivided these noble princes were;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And o'er their helmets, harmless, flew many a well-aimed spear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Between the glitt'ring targets from each opposing knight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And blood-stained were thebucklers that whilom shone so bright.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And, in the stress of battle, full many an eager knight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dismounted from his charger. Thus, hand to hand, did fight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried the bold, and Lud'ger, who each did each defy.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw the broken splinters of shafts and lances fly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Fast flew the shield-clasps, severed by mighty Siegfried's hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He thought himself the victor, this prince of Netherland,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Over the dauntless Saxons \—so many wounded lay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ha, how the bright mail-armour at Dankwart's strokes did fray!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Just then the Saxon Lud'ger espied upon a shield</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A kingly crown emblazoned, which Siegfried's arm did wield.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then knew he, of a surety, that 'twas the mighty man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The chieftain to his comrades loudly to call began:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Forego your fighting, warriors,—my lieges, all is done!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For here have I seen Siegfried, the royal Siegmund's son;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried the mighty hero mine eyes have seen, I trow,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sent by some evil devil to work us Saxons woe."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then lowered were the ensigns at Ludeger's command.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For peace he sued; which, erelong, was granted to his band;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though he as Gunther's pris'ner must go to Burgundy:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bold Siegfried's hand alone 'twas that won this victory.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>By general agreement the combat then was stopped,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a battered buckler was by the fighters dropped,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a helm;— whatever was found upon the land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Bore on it blood-red traces of some Burgundian hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They captured whom they listed: all had they in their power.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And King Gemot and Hagen,—of chivalry the flower,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had the sick borne on litters; and, with them, took they then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As prisoners to the Rhineland, five hundred goodly men.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile the vanquished warriors to Denmark rode away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor could the Saxons boast of much better luck than they,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That any one need praise them: sore vexed these heroes were.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The friends, too, of the fallen bewailed them, in despair.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They had their arms and weapons unto the Rhine conveyed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How well now all had ended! With his brave warriors' aid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried the prince had done it, as he did all things, well:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which even Gunther's liegemen were bound in truth to tell.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To Worms a message firstly the gallant Gemot sent,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To let his friends and kinsmen know how the matter went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And what success had crowned them,—him and his lieges all:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For honour had they striven, and gallantly withal.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The young esquires ran quickly, and soon the news was told.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And they for joy exulted,—whom grief before did hold,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At these all-welcome tidings, which to the city came.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many were the questions asked by each noble dame:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" How had they fared, the warriors of the most noble king? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One of the squires they, straightway, before Kriemhilda bring:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But this was done in secret, she took no open part,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though there was one among them to whom was pledged her heart.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And when she saw the envoy into her chamber led,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Kriemhild, the beauteous maiden, in voice most kindly said:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" Now tell me the dear tidings and gold I'll give to thee;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And tell'st thou with no lying, a friend thou hast in me.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" How fared my brother Gemot amid the fight? " she said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" And other friends and kinsmen? have we left many dead?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And who did best of any? fain would I hear of thee."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then outspake that bold herald: " Of cravens none had we!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Yet, in the thick of battle rode ne'er a man so well,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Oh, Princess high and mighty,—since I the truth must tell,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As did the noble stranger, who came from Netherland:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many a wondrous deed was wrought by bold Siegfried's hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" For what great feats soever in battle may have done</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Dankwart and Sir Hagen and many another one;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howe'er they fought for honour, it all was idle wind</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Compared with Siegfried's doings, the son of Siegelind.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Though in the strife of battle full many a hero fell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The wonders wrought by Siegfried no man hath words to tell!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor all his deeds of daring when he to battle rode:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Through him, for fallen kinsmen, the women's tears have flowed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And many a girl's betrothed one ne'er rose from off that ground.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the brazen helmets one heard his blows resound;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And from the death-wounds spurted hot streams of crimson blood:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In all his acts is Siegfried a gallant knight and good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" What doughty deeds were wrought by Ortwein, of Metz the lord!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How ever many foemen he came at with his sword,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There did he leave them lying—the better part were dead;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And yet no less of Gemot, your brother, might be said.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" For he did work such ruin as ne'er was seen in fight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In truth, one must confess here of each well-proven knight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Among the proud Burgundians, that they all bravely bore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Themselves, and kept their honour untarnished evermore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Full many an empty saddle their handiwork did show;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with their bright swords' clashing loud did the field echo.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The Rhenish heroes truly, so fell a riding made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twere better for their foemen if they at home had stayed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" The two bold knights of Tronje did work much dire distress,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What time the charging armies did one another press.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a warrior perished beneath bold Hagen's hand;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There's much to tell of him yet here in Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Sindold and Hunold also, who were King Gernot's men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And the bold warrior Runold, such doughty deeds did then.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That Ludeger the Saxon must rue, until he die,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ever he thy kinsmen did on the Rhine defy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Yet still the best achievement that on that field hath been,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Or any, from the youngest to the oldest man hath seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was done in knightly fashion by Siegfried's own right hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Rich hostages he bringeth here, into Gunther's land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"These by sheer strength he vanquished, the brave and goodly wight!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Ludegast of Denmark hath suffered great despite,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Ludeger his brother, who from the Saxons came.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now hearken to my tidings, most rich and noble dame!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" They twain were taken prisoners, and that by Siegfried's hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Never so many captives were brought into this land</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As to the Rhine are coming only for Siegfried's part."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No news could have been dearer to Lady Kriemhild's heart.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" Unwounded captives bring they,—five hundred men and more;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then the deadly- wounded,—of bloody biers fourscore;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full eighty bloodstained stretchers, my Lady, understand!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The better part of these were slain by bold Siegfried's hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" They who, thus overweening, have flouted us on Rhine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Must now, as battle-pris'ners, in Gunther's kingdom pine:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yea, even now they bring them with joy unto our land."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then sweetly flushed her fair face, as she did understand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Her lovely face, with pleasure, became all rosy red;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For, by good luck, deliver'd out of the direst need</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had been her goodly warrior,—the young man, Prince Siegfried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For all her friends rejoiced she,—as she was bound, indeed.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the winsome maiden: "Well hast thou said, and now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou shalt have costly raiment for guerdon, that I owe;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And ten good golden marks too; they shall be brought thee here I "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such tidings to rich ladies a man would gladly bear!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They gave him for his guerdon the raiment and the gold.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then to the windows hastened the fair maids, to behold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The horsemen up the street come: and, watching eagerly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They saw the gallant riders come home to Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They came, the hale and hearty, the wounded also came.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They heard the neighbours' greetings, and need not blush for shame.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host rode forth rejoicing to meet his guests again:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It was a joyful ending to all his anxious pain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He welcomed home his warriors, and all the strangers too;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To the great king 'twas fitting not otherwise to do</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than graciously to tender his thanks to those who came,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who had in fight defended the honour of his name.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Gunther asked for tidings, that he to hear was fain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of those who had returned not,—their comrades who were slain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But sixty men were missing, and he had lost no more;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For these they might cease mourning, as for the brave of yore.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The men who were unwounded brought many a battered shield,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a dinted helmet, to Gunther from that field.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the royal palace dismounted all the men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And, with a shout of gladness, were welcomed home again.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Twas ordered then to billet the warriors in the town.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king bade that his guests be well- treated, as his own.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The wounded must be cared for and granted quiet rest;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E'en for his foes his kindness the king did manifest.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To Ludegast of Denmark he said: " Be welcome here!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though, through your fault, much damage we have incurred, I fear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But that will be repaid me, if I have luck! " quoth he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" May God reward my brave friends, who fought so well for me."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And you do well to thank them," King Ludeger outspake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>" For never king before did such high-born prisoners take!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The honourable usage shall well rewarded be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which unto us, your foemen, you've granted graciously."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>" I'll let ye both," cried Gunther, " here, on the spot, go free.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If all the other pris'ners swear to remain with me.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For these I will have pledges, that they leave not my land</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Without my given warrant." Thereon each gave his hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All were to rest and comfort within the hostels brought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They put to bed the wounded, with kindly care and thought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While to the hale and hearty good wine and mead they gave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A gayer time and gladder the folk could never have.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The battered shields were taken and put away in store.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of blood-besprinkled saddles were there enough and more;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men were told to hide them, in case the women wept.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Still many a way-worn horseman into the city crept.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For his guests the king provided with kindness wonderful.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With strangers and indwellers the land was very full.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Those who lay sorely wounded he greatly cared for, too.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas thus the good king humbled his proud and haughty foe.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To all well skilled in leechcraft no guerdon was denied.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unstinted store of silver and shining gold beside,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If they could heal the heroes, who wounded were in fight:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To load his guests with presents was eke this king's delight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>If any there were minded to journey home again,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They, in most friendly fashion, were bidden to remain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then the king took counsel how to reward his men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who had his will accomplished with honour and with pain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warrior Gemot counselled: " Let these now homeward ride!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In six weeks' time we'll bid them, if nothing should betide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Return with us to join in a great festivity;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By then may they be healed who sorely wounded lie."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For leave asked Siegfried likewise, the lord of Netherland;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But when the royal Gunther his wish did understand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He lovingly entreated his dear friend not to go;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though, but for Gunther's sister, he would have gone, I trow.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Though Siegfried was too wealthy to care for the king's pay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right well had he deserved it. He was his friend alway.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke of all his kinsmen: for had their eyes not seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How by his strength in combat the victory had been?</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For love of the fair maiden he thought he still would stay,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Perchance he yet might see her: which came to pass one day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Just as he most desired;— he learnt to know the maid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thereafter to his country right joyously he sped.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Each day in knightly contests the host would prove his men:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which willingly were practised by many a proud young thane.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then had he seats erected by Worms, upon the strand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For those whom he awaited in his Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>About this time, when well-nigh the coming guests were due,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The beauteous Kriemhilda heard what he had in view:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he, with friends, was meaning to keep high festival.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then was a great commotion among the fair dames all</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As to the robes and ribands 'twere best for each to wear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the rich queen Ute the tidings straight they bear</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of the proud stranger-warriors, who now were on their way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then from her presses took she rich clothes and raiment gay.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For love of her dear children she had these garments made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherewith were soon adorned full many a dame and maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a bold young hero of the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For many strangers, likewise, rich clothes she did command.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
