<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XVI.— HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN.</h2>

916. 
King Gunther now and Hagen, those knights exceeding bold, 
Had treacherously plotted a woodland hunt to hold. 
With lances sharp pursuing the boar in forest free. 
The wild bull and the bear too : what bolder sport could be ? 



XVI.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN. 1 5/ 

917. 
With them rode Siegfried also, in honourable mind. 
They carried food, too, with them, and that in divers kind. 
Hard by a cool spring was he foredoom'd to lose his life. 
And this was by the counsel of Brunhild, Gunther's wife. 

918. 
First went the bold thane thither where he Kriemhilda found, 
Already on pack-horses his hunting-gear was bound, 
And that of his companions : to cross the Rhine they meant, 
Kriemhilda ne'er before had such reason to lament. 

919. 
And then his own beloved he on the mouth did kiss : 
" God grant that I may find thee, my wife, safe, after this ; 
And that thine eyes may see me ! With good friends, till I come 
Beguile the time of waiting, I may not bide at home." 

920. 
Now thought she of the secret she had to Hagen told : — 
She did not dare to own it, — nor longer could withhold 
The noble queen lamenting that she had e'er been born ! 
For thus with grief unmeasured did Siegfried's fair wife mourn. 

921. 
She spake unto the warrior : " Ah, let your hunting be ! 
Last night I had an ill dream : two wild boars I did see 
That chased you o'er the moorland : the flowers grew red as blood. 
If I do weep thus sorely, 'tis that I bode no good. 

922. 
** I have a sore misgiving that there may be some plot : 
Whether some grudge be owed us for service rendered not, 
Which may be bringing on us dire hate and enmity ? 
Go not, dear lord, I beg thee in truth and honesty." 



158 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [aDV. 

923- 
" My love, in but a few days again I shall be here. 
Nor know I of these people one who ill-will doth bear ; 
To me at all times friendly are all thy kith and kin : 
Nor by these warriors elsewise entreated have I been." 

924. 
** Nay, nay, my dear lord Siegfried, I bode thy fate too well : 
Last night my evil dreaming told how upon thee fell 
Two mountains in the valley ; I saw thee never more. 
If thou wilt thus forsake me, 'twill wound me to the core." 

925- 

His wife so good and loving he in his arms did press, 
And cherish'd her fair body with kisses numberless ; 
Then took his last leave of her, and tore himself away ; 
Alas, no more she saw him alive after that day ! 

926. 
Now rode they forth and came to a deep and shady wood, 
For sake of sport, and many a warrior bold and good 
Did follow after Gunther and with his sportsmen roam. 
But Giselher and Gemot, they two remained at home. 

927. 
And many horses, laden with stores of bread and wine 
Provided for the huntsmen, went forward o'er the Rhine ; 
Both fish and flesh they carry, and many another cate 
Such as a king so wealthy might duly have to eat. 

928. 
They ordered their encampment, these hunters proud, hard by 
The greenwood's skirts, where mostly the quarry's runs did lie 
Which they to hunt were minded ; 'twas on an eyot broad, 
And thither too came Siegfried : as straight the king had word. 



XVI.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN. 159 

929. 

The hunters then appointed the watchers where to take 
Their places at the openings. Then he, the bold man, spake, 
Siegfried the ever-stalwart, " Who leads us through the wood, 
To show us where the game is, ye valiant thanes and good ? " 

930- 
*' Suppose we part," quoth Hagen, ** or ever we begin 
To beat about the forest to see what is therein. 
That I and these my masters may reason have to know 
Who are the better sportsmen that on this chase do go. 

931- 
" The beaters and the hounds too, we'll evenly divide : 
Thus each his choice may follow where'er he please to ride. 
Then he who is best sportsman shall have our thanks therefore." 
So spake he, and the hunters together stay'd no more. 

932. 
Then said the noble Siegfried : " The hounds I value not, 
Save but a single setter, who such a scent hath got 
That he the track will follow where'er the game hath led ; 
Here's to a merry hunting ! " Kriemhilda's husband said. 

933. 

Thereon an aged huntsman took with him a sleuth-hound. 
And brought the noble hunters to where much game they found 
Without too long a-seeking. The comrades then did hunt 
Whatever broke from covert, as sportsmen keen are wont. 



934. 
Whate'er the setter mark'd him, that slew with his own hand 
Siegfried the doughty hero, who came from Netherland. 
His steed so swiftly bore him, that naught could him outrun ; 
Praise above all the others upon this chase he won. 



l60 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

935. 
In all he put his hand to alert he was enow ; 
Of all the beasts, the first one that he to death did do 
An ox was, strong and savage, that with his hand he fell'd; 
And then he, on a sudden, a lion grim beheld. 

936. 
E'en as the hound aroused it he with his bow let fly, 
On which a sharpen'd arrow he'd fitted hastily. 
After the shot the lion but three bounds further ran ; 
Whereon his hunting comrades to thank Siegfried began. 

937- 
There after he an elk slew, and then a buffalo, 
And then four sturdy bisons, a savage stag also. 
His steed so swiftly bore him that naught could get away: 
Of harts and hinds scarce any there were he fail'd to slay. 

938. 
A huge wild boar the sleuth-hound had routed from his lair. 
And when to flee he turn'd him right in his path was there 
The hero of the hunting, all ready for the fight ; 
The savage brute did straightway charge at the valiant knight. 

939- 
This boar Kriemhilda's husband then with his broadsword slew : 
The like no other huntsman so easily could do. 
And when he thus had felled him, they put in leash the hound : 
His goodly spoils were talk'd of all Burgundy around. 

940. 

Then spake to him his huntsmen : " If 'tis for us to say, 
Leave us, we pray, Lord Siegfried, a few live beasts to slay ! 
To-day thou hast made empty for us both wood and wold." 
Thereat he fell to smiHng that worthy thane and bold. 



XVI.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN. l6r 

941. 
Then suddenly, on all sides, were heard great noise and cries. 
From dogs and men together such tumult did arise 
That all the woodland echoed, and eke the mountain-side 
For four-and-twenty leash-hounds the hunters had untied. 

942. 
Then many a forest creature must unto death be done, 
Since every hunter fancied that he might be the one 
To win the prize for hunting : but no award could be 
Until beside the camp-fire stout Siegfried they did see. 

943- 

The hunting, though 'twas over, was not yet brought to end : 
For some, with burdens laden, to camp their way did wend. 
Of beast fells bringing many, and game a goodly store. 
What piles of it for cooking the king's camp-servants bore ! 

944. 
Then to the high-born hunters the king would have it known 
That he to dine was ready. Then all at once was blown 
A hunting-horn, right loudly, that all might know around 
That now the noble princes would at the camp be found. 

945- 
Quoth one of Siegfried's huntsmen : " Sir, I have heard but now, 
By sounding of a horn, that 'tis time for us to go 
Back to the camp : in answer I will my bugle wind." 
Then went the loud blasts flying their followers to find. 

946. 
Then spake the noble Siegfried : " Now let us leave the wood 1 '* 
His hunter bore him smoothly : and all in haste they rode. 
They startled, with their clatter, a grisly brute and grim, — 
A savage bear. Then, turning to those who followed him, 

M 



l62 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

947. 
The thane cried : " Now our comrades a little fun shall share ! 
Loose from the leash the setter ; yonder I spy a bear ; 
I'll see that he goes with us from here unto the camp. 
He never can escape us, however fast he tramp ! " 

948. 

They loosed the hound, and swiftly the bear before them hied. 
Then thought Kriemhilda's husband close after him to ride ; 
But to a ground-rift came he, whereby it could not be ; 
The sturdy beast made certain 'twas from the huntsmen free. 

949. 
The proud knight, from his charger, sprang down upon the sward: 
And straight began to chase it ; the beast was off its guard. 
And could not now outrun him : the hero clasp'd it round. 
And, in a trice, unwounded, he held it tightly bound. 

950- 
The man it was not able to scratch or bite one jot ! 
He bound it to his saddle, then promptly up he got. 
Unto the camp he bore it, — a prize of hardihood ; 
Which all was but a pastime to that knight bold and good. 

951. 

How noble was his bearing as into camp he rode ! 
His spear was very mighty, and thereto stout and broad. 
Right down unto the rowel a handsome long-sword hung : 
And a fair horn around him of ruddy gold was slung. 

952. 
Of better hunting-habit I never have been told. 
In tunic of black velvet there was he to behold ; 
A riding-cap of sable, handsome enough, he wore ; 
Ay, and what broider'd fillets he on his quiver bore I 



XVI.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN. I63 

953- 
Upon it there was fitted a cap of panther's hide, 
Because of its sweet odour. He carried at his side 
A bow, such that it needed, — to draw it to the full,— 
A hand-winch, when another save he himself did pull. 

954. 

And then his nether garments of otter-skin were made. 
From head to foot his raiment with tufts was overlaid. 
And, 'mid the sleek fur, many a thread of golden twine 
Of this bold champion-hunter on either side did shine. 

955. 
And Balmung bore he also, — a handsome blade and broad, 
That was so sharp, moreover, its edge was never scored 
When helms by it were dinted ; and either edge was keen. 
Ne'er had that noble huntsman of gayer spirit been. 

956. 

Since I have undertaken the story to declare, 

I must tell how his quiver was fill'd with arrows rare ; 

The shafts of them were golden, the points a hand-breadth wide. 

Whate'er with them he pierced, surely and swiftly died. 

957. 
So rode the noble hero in all his hunting gear ; 
And Gunther's men espied him as he to them drew near. 
They hurried out to meet him, and led his horse along. 
There lay across his saddle the bear so huge and strong. 

958. 
As soon as he alighted he loosed the binding thong 
From off its paws and muzzle ; then yelpings loud and long 
Of hounds arose, so soon as afoot the bear appear'd. 
The brute would to the forest : the folk were fairly scared. 



l64 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

959- 
The bear, through all the shouting, into the kitchen ramp'd : 
Hey, how the frighted scullions from round the fire decamp'd ! 
The kettles toppled over, the burning sticks were drown'd : 
Hey, what a store of victuals lay in the ashes round ! 

960. 
Quick from their seats upsprang they, the masters and the men. 
The bear began a-growling : the king gave orders then 
To let loose all the hound-pack, that in their leashes lay. 
Had it herewith but ended that were a merry day ! 

961. 
With bows and spears provided they stay'd no longer there, 
But off the swift ones started to follow up the bear. 
Yet no one shot : so closely the dogs were thronging round. 
The shouting of the people made hill and dale resound. 

962. 
With all the pack behind him the bear began to race, 
But, save Kriemhilda's husband, no one could match its pace. 
He quickly ran upon it, and with a sword-stroke slew. 
Then to the camp-fire, slaughter'd, the grisly brute they drew. 

963. 
And all who saw, were saying he was a mighty man. 
The hunters proud were summon'd, and then the feast began. 
Upon a fair green meadow, a goodly crowd they sate ; 
Ha, 'twas a royal banquet these haughty hunters ate ! 

964. 

The cupbearers still came not, who were the wine to bring, — 
No heroes ever better deserved such off'ering ; 
Had there not been in secret such treacherous intent. 
Then free had been those warriors of all disparagement. 



XVI.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN. 165 

965. 
Then spake the noble Siegfried : "I marvel much hereat ; — 
Since from the kitchen plenty of food they send to eat, 
Why come not the cupbearers to bring us also wine ? 
Let them treat hunters better, or 'tis no sport of mine ! 

966. 
" I have deserved that people more care of me should take.** 
The king then from the table, in answer, falsely spake : 
" However we have blunder'd we'll mend it by-and-by; 
'Tis all the fault of Hagen, who'd have us all go dry." 

967. 
Then Hagen spake, of Tronje : *' My dear lord list to me, 
I reckon'd that the hunting to-day was fix'd to be 
Right over in the Spessart, so sent the wine-flasks there. 
If we to-day go thirsty, next time I'll take more care ! " 

968. 
Then answer'd the lord Siegfried : " Small thanks, methinks, are 

thine ! 
Seven sumpters' burden should they of mead and unmix'd wine 
Have hither sent to meet us ; or were that hard to do. 
They should have pitch'd our quarters more nigh the Rhine unto." 

969. 
Then spake Hagen of Tronje : "Ye noble knights and bold, 
I know that here hard by is a spring of water cold, — 
Pray be ye not offended, — 'tis thither we should go." 
To many a thane this counsel was fraught with mickle woe, 

970. 
With pangs of thirst was Siegfried the warrior sorely smit : 
The sooner then the table he gave them word to quit ; 
Along the hill-side would he unto the fountain wend. 
Thus what the knights had plotted drew on towards its end. 



l66 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

971. 
The game that had been slaughter'd by Siegfried's cunning hand, 
They bade men pile on wagons, and carry through the land. 
And everyone who saw it his praise and honour spake. 
Right grievously did Hagen his troth to Siegfried break. 

972. 

Whilst to the shady lindens they were upon their way, 
Cried Hagen, lord of Tronje : " Oft have I heard men say 
That to Kriemhilda's husband no one a match could be 
When he would show his paces : ay ! will he let us see ! " 

973. 
Then spake the Netherlander Siegfried, the valiant : 
" Now is the time for trying, if ye a wager want, 
From here unto the fountain ; so soon as it be done 
The onlookers shall settle which is the foremost one." 

974. 
" Now verily we'll try it," the warrior Hagen said. 
Then quoth the stalwart Siegfried : " If ye come in ahead, 
Before your feet I'll lay me full length upon the grass." 
When Gunther heard the promise, how glad at heart he was ! 

975. 
Then spake the bold thane further: "Yet something more I'll 

say, 
I'll carry all the clothing that I have worn to-day, — 
My spear and eke my buckler, and all my hunting gear." 
His sword and quiver bound he around him then and there. 

976. 
But they, the king and Hagen, their upper clothes did doff: 
In two white shirts one saw them stand ready to be off. 
As fleet as two wild panthers they through the clover ran : 
Yet at the spring bold Siegfried came in the foremost man. 



XVI.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN. 167 

977. 
In all he put his hand to he won the prize from all. 
Straightway his sword he loosen'd and let his quiver fall ; 
Against a bough of linden he let his stout spear rest ; 
Close by the flowing fountain now stood the stately guest. 

978. 
And herein also Siegfried did manifest his worth : 
He laid his shield beside him where flow'd the fountain forth, 
But, greatly as he thirsted, the hero tasted not 
Before the king had drunken : base thanks from him he got. 

979- 
Cool was the spring of water, and clean, and bright, and good ; 
And Gunther bent him downwards to the refreshing flood ; 
As soon as he had quenched his thirst, away he came ; 
Then ready was bold Siegfried and would have done the same. 

980. 
His courtesy and breeding, then met with their reward : 
For Hagen to the background withdrew his bow and sword. 
Then back again ran quickly to where he found the spear, 
And looked to find a token the hero's coat did bear. 

981. 
And whilst the noble Siegfried drank of the rippling flood 
He stabb'd him through the cross-mark, and through the wound 

his blood 
Straight from his heart outspurted, and Hagen's shirt was wet ; 
So foul a misdeed never befell a hero yet. 

982. 
He left the lance within him close to his heart stuck tight ; 
And grimly then did Hagen betake himself to flight, 
As in his life he never from mortal man did flee. 
The stalwart Siegfried, feeling how sorely smit was he. 



1 68 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

983. 
All madly from the fountain in rage and anguish sprang, 
Whilst from between his shoulders a long lance-shaft did hang. 
The chieftain thought to find there his bow, or else his sword : 
Then verily had Hagen not gone without reward. 

984. 
But when the knight sore-wounded his sword had fail'd to find, 
And saw that they had left him naught save his shield behind, 
He gripp'd it from the well's side, and after Hagen ran: 
Then vainly to escape him essay'd King Gunther's man. 

985. 
Though he to death was wounded, so mightily smote he, 
That from the hero's buckler there fell abundantly 
The precious stones that deck'd it ; the shield itself did break ; 
The noble guest his vengeance was fain enow to wreak. 

986. 

Yet by his hand must Hagen lie stretch'd upon the ground. 
So hard, in sooth, his blows were, they made the glebe resound. 
Had he his sword had handy, then Hagen had been slain. 
The wound was burning sorely, and made him writhe with pain. 

987. 
His cheeks had lost their colour ; no longer stand could he. 
And all his strength of body was failing utterly ; 
Death's sign upon his forehead in pallid hue he bore : 
Fair women soon were mourning for him with weeping sore. 

988. 
Then fell Kriemhilda's husband upon the flowery sward : 
One saw from out the lance-wound, how fast his life-blood pour'd. 
Upbraiding then began he, — forced by his mortal pain, — 
Those who had thus betray'd him and treacherously slain. 



XVI.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SLAIN. 1 69 

989. 
" Ye perjured, lying cowards," the dying warrior said, 
** What hath avaiFd my service, since thus ye strike me dead ? 
To you aye was I faithful : and thus do ye repay ! 
Your kith and kin shall suffer for what yeVe wrought this day. 

990. 
" The children born unto ye shall be, from this day forth, 
For evermore accursed, for ye have wreak'd your wrath, 
And vengeance all too sorely upon my body done : 
Now ye, with scorn and hatred, all worthy knights shall shun." 

991. 
The knights all ran together to where he stricken lay. 
To many a man among them it was a joyless day. 
They who had aught of honour sore lamentation made. 
From all he well deserved it, this hero undismay'd. 

992. 
The king of the Burgundians mourn'd also for his death. 
Then spake the dying chieftain : " Small need is there, in faith, 
That he who work'd the evil should grieve that it be done : 
Much blame he hath deserved : 'twere better left alone ! " 

993- 
Grim Hagen spake to Gunther : " What art thou weeping for? 
For done is our vexation and all our sorrows o'er : 
We shall find few henceforward who 'gainst us dare to stand. 
Glad am I that his kingship hath perish'd by my hand ! " 

994. 
" 'Tis easy now to vaunt ye," said Siegfried, in reply, 
" If I had known beforehand your deadly enmity, 
Alone would I against ye have well maintain'd my life : 
For naught grieve I so sorely as for Kriemhild, my wife. 



I/O THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS, [ADV. 

995- 
" And now must God forgive me, that I a son did get 
Whom folks shall taunt in future and let him not forget 
That kin of his by some one was murderously slain. 
If that avail'd," said Siegfried, " right well might I complain.'' 

996. 

Yet once more spake the hero, in anguish nigh to death : 
*' If thou, O king most noble, art willing to hold faith 
With any living being, I fain would now consign 
Unto your grace avid favour, that well-loved wife of mine. 

997- 
" And let her from this profit, that thou her brother art : 
If there is faith in princes, stand by her with true heart. 
My father and my liegemen must tarry long for me ; 
Ne'er worse to any woman could loss of dear friend be." 

998. 
All round about, the flowers were wetted with his blood, 
As now with Death he struggled : nor long the strife withstood. 
Alas, the deadly weapon too well had done its part ! 
Then mote he speak no further, that warrior of bold heart. 

999. 
And when the nobles saw that the hero was quite dead, 
Upon a shield they laid him, that was of wrought gold red ; 
And straightway held they counsel how they might best take heed 
From all to keep it hidden that Hagen did the deed. 

1000. 
Then divers of them counsell'd : " Woe hath befallen us. 
But ye must all conceal it, and tell the story thus : 
* As Dame Kriemhilda's husband alone a-hunting rode. 
Some vagabonds set on him and slew him in the wood.' " 



XVIL] how SIEGFRIED WAS MOURN'D AND BURIED. I/I 

1001. 
Then spake of Tronje Hagen : " Myself I'll take him home, 
It matters not to me that the truth to her should come : 
Brunhilda's mind hath sorely by her been harassed, 
It troubles me but little what tears she now may shed ! " 



ADVENTURE XVIL— HOW KRIEMHILDA MOURN'D FOR HER HUSBAND, AND HOW HE WAS BURIED. 

1002. 
Then waited they for nightfall, and o'er the Rhine did row : 
Ne'er to more direful ending could heroes hunting go. 
The quarry they had slaughter'd mourn'd noble maids and wives: 
And many goodly warriors paid for it with their lives. 

1003. 
Of arrogance o'erweening the tale ye soon shall hear, 
And of a fearful vengeance. Then Hagen bade men bear 
The body of dead Siegfried, the Niblung lord of late, 
And lay it in a chamber wherein Kriemhild did wait. 

1004. 
He had him laid in secret down close beside her door, 
That she might find him lying when she, as heretofore, 
Went forth to matins early, ere daylight had begun ; 
Which duty dame Kriemhilda but seldom left undone. 

1005. 
The wonted bell was ringing, which to the minster bade ; 
Then rose the fair Kriemhilda and waken'd many a maid : 
She bade them bring a taper, and fetch her all her gear. 
Then came a chamber-servant who lit on Siegfried there. 



172 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1006. 
In red blood he was lying, and all his garb was wet ; 
But that it was his master he did not know as yet. 
Into the room he carried the candle in his hand, 
From him did Dame Kriemhilda some ill news understand. 



1007. 
For, as she with her women would to the minster fare, 
The chamberlain spake to her : " My lady, stay you there ! 
Right opposite the doorway a murder'd knight doth lie." 
Whereat began Kriemhilda to weep unmeasuredly. 

1008. 
Before she knew for certain that 'twas her husband dead, 
Unto her mind recall'd she how Hagen questioned 
In what way he might guard him : then first she was afraid. 
An he were dead, her pleasure was all to sorrow made. 

1009. 
To earth down sank she swooning, and ne'er a word could say : 
Upon the hapless fair one men gazed as there she lay. 
The grief of Dame Kriemhilda was past all measuring : 
After her swoon, the chamber did with her wailing ring. 

lOIO. 

Her people said unto her : " What if it be a guest ? " 
But from her mouth came flowing the blood, by anguish press'd ; 
Then spake she : "'Tis my husband, my own belov'd Siegfried : 
It was Brunhilda's counsel, and Hagen did the deed." 

ion. 
The lady bade them lead her where she her hero found. 
With her white hand she lifted his fair head from the ground ; 
Red as he was with blood-stains, well knew she him again. — 
There lay the Niblung hero, so pitifully slain. 



XVII.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS MOURN'D AND BURIED. 173 

1012. 
Then in her sorrow cried she, that fair and gentle queen : 
" Woe on mine evil fortune ! Upon thy shield is seen 
No dint of any sword-stroke : thou liest murder'd there. 
And wist I who hath done it, of death mote he be ware." 



1013. 
Thereon all her attendants began to wail and weep : 
With their beloved lady, their grief indeed was deep 
About their noble master, of whom they were forlorn. 
Thus heavily had Hagen made good Brunhilda's scorn. 

1014. 
Then sorrowfully spake she : " Go hence now, all of ye, 
And waken Siegfried's liegemen as quickly as may be. 
And unto Siegmund also my sorrow must ye tell. 
If so be he will help me to mourn brave Siegfried well." 

1015. 

A messenger ran swiftly and found them where they lay, — 
Siegfried's own band of heroes from Niblung land were they. 
He told the grievous tidings, and joy fled at his word ; 
Yet would they not believe it till they the wailing heard. 

1016. 
The messenger sped further to where he found the king. 
Unto the noble Siegmund that night no sleep did bring ; 
His heart within foreboded what happ'd to him, I ween : 
How that his dear son living should never more be seen. 

1017. 
*" Awake, arise, Lord Siegmund ! Kriemhilda, my mistress, 
Hath bidden me to fetch thee ; to her a sore distress 
Hath happ'd beyond all others, which cuts her to the heart : 
And thou must help her mourning, for thou in it hast part." 



174 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [aDV. 

1018. 
Upstarted Siegmund, crying : " What grief hath happened 
Unto the fair Kriemhilda, as thou just now hast said?" 
Then spake the herald, weeping, " I cannot it withhold : 
Ay ! Siegfried hath been murder'd, the Netherlander bold ! " 

1019. 
Then spake the noble Siegmund : " Pray let this jesting be, 
And of such evil stories, beware, for love of me, 
The like you tell to no man, — how Siegfried hath been slain : 
In such case could I never live happily again." 



" If thou wilt not believe me when thou hast heard my tale, 
With thine own ears 'tis easy to hear Kriemhilda wail ; 
For she and all her people are mourning Siegfried dead." 
Then sore afraid was Siegmund : and sad was he indeed. 

1021. 
Straight from his couch upsprang he, with five score of his men ; 
They reach'd their hands in search of their weapons long and 

keen. 
And ran, grief-stricken, thither to where they heard the cries ; 
Then, too, the thousand warriors of Siegfried bold did rise. 

1022. 
Whilst piteously the women were heard to weep and moan, 
Some of the men bethought them that raiment they should don : 
Ay, scarcely for their trouble could they their senses keep. 
And bitter was the anguish that in their hearts lay deep. 

1023. 
Soon came the royal Siegmund to where Kriemhild did stand. 
He spake : "Woe on the journey that brought us to this land 
Who hath thy husband taken, and reft me of my son. 
And, amidst friends and kinsmen, thus murderously done ? " 



XVII.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS MOURN'D AND BURIED. 175 

1024. 
" Ah, if I only knew him ! " the noble wife did say, 
" No mercy would I show him, in mind or body aye : 
Such evil would I do him, that if his kith and kin 
Had not good cause for weeping, 'twould be no fault of mine." 

1025. 

Then in his arms did Siegmund the murder'd prince enfold ; 
Whereat his friends their sorrow so little could withhold, 
That with their lamentation the palace rang and hall ; 
And even through Worms city, the sounds of woe did fall. 

1026. 
To none who strove to comfort did Siegfried's wife give heed. 
Meanwhile from out its clothing his body fair they freed ; 
They washed his wounds with water, and laid him on the bier ; 
The sorrow of his people right grievous was to hear. 

1027. 
Then up and spake his warriors the men of Niblung-land : 
" With right goodwill shall vengeance be taken at our hand ; 
Within this very fortress is he who did the deed." 
Then ran they all for weapons the liegemen of Siegfried. 

1028. 
These thanes, for valour chosen, each with his shield, were there, 
A thousand and one hundred, ready at hand they were 
To follow noble Siegmund. The murder of his son 
He to avenge was eager, — 'twas needful to be done. 

1029. 
Nor knew they 'gainst what foemen they had to strive withal, 
Unless it might be Gunther and his bold liegemen all, 
With whom their master Siegfried, did late a-hunting go. 
Kriemhilda saw them arming, and grievous was her woe. 



176 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1030. 
However deep her sorrow, and dire as was her need, 
Yet did she for the Niblungs fear with such mighty dread 
Death, by her brother's liegemen, that she would have them stay : 
She warn'd them in all kindness, as friends each other may. 

1031. 
Thus spake the grief-lorn lady; " My lord Siegmund, what dost 
Thou think to take in hand now ? Thou hast not weigh'd the cost. 
King Gunther hath so many bold warriors at command, 
That all of ye will perish if ye his knights withstand." 



1032. 
With shields already lifted, they needs must to the fray ; 
The noble queen besought them and even bade them stay, 
And seek not for a conflict, — these knights of courage high. 
Yet would they not forego it ; which grieved her verily. 

So said she : " Noble Siegmund, 'twere best to let it be 
Until a fitter season : then will I readily 
Avenge with you mine husband. Who me hath widow made, 
To him, when it is proven, shall evil be repaid. 

1034. 
" Hereby upon the Rhine-strand dwells many a haughty knight 
I cannot therefore counsel that you with them should fight. 
Full thirty warriors have they against our every one. 
God grant that they may prosper as they to us have done ! 

I035; 
"Ye must remain beside me, this grief with me to share; 
And, when the day is dawning, ye heroes bold prepare 
To help me in his coffin my husband dear to lay." 
Then all the thanes made answer : " It shall be as you say." 



XVII.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS MOURN'D AND BURIED. 1 7/ 

1036. 
No tongue could ever tell you the marvel of it, how 
From knights as well as ladies arose the cries of woe, 
So that throughout the city the noise thereof did sound. 
The noble burghers heard it, and quickly throng'd around. 

1037. 
They mourned with the strangers, for they themselves were sad. 
If fault had been with Siegfried, none told them that it had, 
Nor why the noble warrior had forfeited his life. 
Then wept, too, with the women, each worthy burgher's wife. 

1038. 
The smiths were bidden quickly a coffin to devise 
Of gold y- wrought and silver, strong and of mickle size ; 
They bade them firmly bind it, with temper'd steel and good. 
Then truly all the people were sorrowful of mood. 

1039. 
The night was spent, and daylight 'twas said would soon appear. 
The noble lady bade them unto the minster bear 
Siegfried their noble master, her husband well-beloved. 
One saw his friends all weeping, as they the body moved. 

1040. 
They brought him to the minster, and toll'd was many a bell : 
On every side the chanting of priests was heard to swell. 
And thither came King Gunther, and all his folk with him, 
To take part in the mourning ; and likewise Hagen grim. 

1041. 
He said : " My dearest sister, alas, indeed, for thee ! 
That from thy sorrow's burden can none of us be free : 
We must bewail for ever the loss of Siegfried's life." 
*'That do ye without reason," answer'd the mourning wife. 

N 



178 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1042. 
" It never need have happen'd if real your sorrow were ; 
Me must ye have forgotten, — that may I well aver, — 
When I was there bereft of my own beloved one. 
I would to God," said Kriemhild, " it had to me been done ! " 

1043. 
They clave unto their lying. Kriemhild began again : 
" Whoso of you is guiltless, now let him make it plain ; — 
Let each before the people walk up unto the bier ; 
Thereby the truth that 's in him shall presently appear.'* 

1044. 
It is a wondrous marvel that oft hath happened : 
That when one sees the slayer beside the murder'd dead. 
The wounds afresh start bleeding ; as here, too, came to pass. 
Whereby men saw that Hagen the malefactor was. 

1045. 
Again the wounds bled freely, as they had done afore ; 
They who had mourn'd him sorely bewail'd him now the more. 
Then spake aloud King Gunther: "I tell you everyone 
'Twas vagabonds that slew him : 'twas not by Hagen done." 

1046. 
" These vagabonds, too surely are known to me," she spake, 
" By friendly hands, God willing, we'll vengeance on them take ! 
Thou Gunther and thou Hagen have surely done this thing." 
By this time Siegfried's warriors for strife were hankering. 

1047. 
Kriemhilda spake yet further: "Now share with me my need." 
Then came those twain unto her who found him lying dead, — 
They were her brother Gemot and Giselher the youth. 
As many a man did later, these mourn'd for him in sooth. 



XVII.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS MOURN'D AND BURIED. 1 79 

1048. 
With all their hearts they mourn'd him, the husband of Kriem- 

hild. 
Now masses must be chanted : the minster soon was fill'd 
With men, and wives, and children, — from every side they came. 
E'en they who little miss'd him mourn'd Siegfried all the same. 

1049. 
Gemot, and Giselher with him, spake : " Sister dear to me, 
Now, for this death, take comfort, as verily must be. 
We will atone unto you as long as we shall live." 
Yet on the earth was no one who could her comfort give. 

1050. 
His coffin was made ready wellnigh about mid-day ; 
Then from the bier they raised him, whereon till then he lay. 
Fain would the noble lady have kept him from the grave ; 
Which unto her attendants sore trouble surely gave. 

1051. 
In richly broider'd vestment they wrapp'd the body round, 
And then, I ween, that no one unweeping there was found. 
With all her heart wept Ute — a noble woman she — 
And each of her attendants the goodly corpse to see. 

1052. 
When people heard the chanting within the church begin, 
And knew that he was coffin'd, they throng'd to enter in : 
For his soul's weal and profit what offerings were made ! 
In sooth, among the foemen good friends enough he had ! 

1053- 
Kriemhilda, the poor lady, said to her chamberlain : 
*' The love they bear towards me will be to them a bane, 
Seeing they grudge him nothing and hold me also dear ; 
For Siegfried's weal 'tis fitting that they his gold should share. 



l80 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1054. 
There was no child so Httle, who any wit might have, 
But joined in the almsgiving, ere he was laid in grave. 
More than a hundred masses were sung ere day was done 
And Siegfried's friends and kinsmen came thronging ev'ry one. 

1055. 
When ended was the chanting the people went away. 
Then spake the lady Kriemhild : " Ye must not let me stay 
Alone to watch beside him, this knight exceeding brave. 
My joys are, with his body, all buried in the grave. 

1056. 
"Three days and three nights longer here would I keep him still, 
Until of my dear husband my heart has had its fill. 
Then what if God should order that death should take me too ? 
Then would poor Kriemhild's sorrows no longer trouble you." 

1057. 
The people from the city now homewards went their way. 
The priests and monks Kriemhilda besought with her to stay, 
A.nd eke her own attendants, to watch beside the knight. 
Forbidding was the darkness and wearisome the light. 

1058.^ 
From eating and from drinking did many a man abstain. 
If any cared to take it, to them it was made plain 
That they might have in plenty : Siegmund of that took care. 
And yet, full many a labour the Niblung-folk must share : 

1059. 
For three whole days, unceasing, — the story thus we hear — 
They who had skill in singing must needs the burden bear 
Of chanting many an office. What alms to them folk paid ! 
They who were poor aforetime now wealth in plenty had. 



XVII.] HOW SIEGFRIED WAS MOURN'D AND BURIED. l8l 

1060. 
Whene'er they found poor people who nothing had to bring, 
They sent them to the minster, with gold for offering 
From Siegfried's treasure taken. Since life he could not have, 
Of marks for his soul's welfare they many thousand gave. 

1061. 
The first-fruits were divided in all the land around, 
Wherever cloister-houses or goodly folk were found. 
Of silver and of raiment the poor got ample store : 
Men did the Hke as showing what love to him they bore. 

1062. 
Upon the third day early, just at the hour of Mass, 
The churchyard wide extending, — that by the minster was, — 
With country-people's wailing was fill'd from end to end. 
In death they did him service, as to a well-loved friend. 

1063. 
In those four days of mourning, indeed, it hath been said, 
That marks full thirty-thousand, or even more, were paid 
For sake of his soul's welfare, and given to the poor. 
Laid low was all his beauty, his life was now no more. 

1064. 
When God was served duly, and all the chants were sung, 
A dreadful cry of sorrow arose from out the throng ; 
Out of the minster must they now bear him to his grave. 
Those who were loth to lose him fresh tears and cries forth gave. 

1065. 
With cries of lamentation the people follow'd then ; 
The faces all were joyless of women and of men. 
Ere in his grave they laid him they sang and read withal ; 
Ay ! and the priests were worthy who gave him burial. 



1 82 THE LAY OF THE NIBELUNGS. [ADV. 

1066. 
Or ever Siegfried's widow had come unto the grave, 
Her faithful heart with sorrow such bitter strife did have 
That they must needs revive her with water from the spring ; 
Her bitterness of sorrow was past all measuring. 

1067. 
It was a mickle wonder that strength again she found. 
With cries of pity, helping, the women throng'd around. 
Then spake the Queen : " O liegemen of Siegfried, hearken ye ! 
I pray you of your fealty a favour grant to me, — 

1068. 
" That after all my sorrow this small grace I may gain, 
And on his goodly features may set my eyes again." 
So long did she beseech them, with all her sorrow's strength, 
That they the splendid coffin must break apart at length. 

1069. 
And then they brought the lady to where her love did lie, 
And she his fair head lifted, with white hand tenderly, 
And in his death she kiss'd him, — the noble knight and good ; 
Her shining eyes, for sorrow, were weeping tears of blood. 

1070. 
It was a piteous parting, if ever there was one. 
And so away they bore her ; she could not go alone, 
For in a swoon and senseless that noble wife lay low ; 
Her life, for weal appointed, was wellnigh lost in woe. 

1071. 
When now their noble master within his grave was laid. 
Unmeasured was the sorrow that all his followers had. 
Who from the Niblung country had borne him company ; 
And little joy or gladness in Siegmund was to see. 



XVIII.] HOW SIEGMUND WENT BACK TO HIS OWN LAND. 1 83 

1072. 
Amongst them there were many who, for their sorrow's sake, 
Till those three days were ended nor meat nor drink did take. 
Yet could they not their bodies abandon utterly : 
So feasting follow'd sorrow, as evermore will be. 



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
