<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup><h2><span epub:type="label">Adventure</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span></h2><h3 epub:type="title">HOW SIEGFRIED CAME TO WORMS</h3></hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The Prince was little troubled</span><span>by pangs of heartache yet!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The people's talk, however,</span><span>erelong his ears beset:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How there was in Burgundia</span><span>a maiden, passing fair;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For her sake joy and sorrow</span><span>thereafter he did bear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The beauty of this maiden</span><span>was famed far and wide;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her lofty mind, 'twas vaunted,</span><span>excelled her beauty's pride,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And brought her many a wooer,</span><span>riding to Gunther's land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who fain would see the damsel,</span><span>and bid for that fair hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And yet, however many</span><span>contended for her love,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Kriemhilda felt in secret</span><span>that none her heart could move;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There was no man among them</span><span>whose love she could reward;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That knight was still a stranger,</span><span>who was to be her lord.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>But when the son of Sieglind</span><span>to lofty love inclined,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Compared with his, all wooing</span><span>was as an idle wind!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right well, in sooth, deserved he</span><span>to win so fair a bride:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Erelong the noble Kriemhild'</span><span>stood at bold Siegfried's side.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His followers and kinsmen,</span><span>seeing that he would wed,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Did counsel that the maiden</span><span>he to the altar led</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should be by birth his equal,—</span><span>for his, and for their sake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Then," cried the gallant Siegfried,</span><span>"Kriemhilda will I take!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"That beauteous young maiden</span><span>of the Burgundian land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For her surpassing beauty.</span><span>Right well I understand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No Kaiser were so mighty</span><span>but, should he need a wife.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That princess were fit consort</span><span>to share his royal life."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A rumour of the matter</span><span>soon reached King Siegmund's ears</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>('Twas buzzed among the people);</span><span>his mind was full of fears</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For this his son's intention;—</span><span>that he was fain to wed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fair and lovely maiden,</span><span>and would not be gainsaid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sieglinda also heard it,</span><span>the noble monarch's wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And much heart-searching had she</span><span>about her dear son's life:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For well she knew King Gunther,</span><span>and his bold warrior-train.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They sought to turn the hero</span><span>back from his wooing vain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then outspake gallant Siegfried:</span><span>"Beloved father mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The love of noble women</span><span>I will for aye resign</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unless I woo where Love is,</span><span>and give my heart its way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such is my purpose truly,—</span><span>whatever men may say.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If thou canst not forego her,"</span><span>the king said, " verily</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My will shall be as thy will,</span><span>and well it pleaseth me;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I will help thee end it,</span><span>and do the best I can:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet hath the royal Gunther</span><span>full many a haughty man!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If it were only Hagen,</span><span>and no one else beside,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He hides 'neath courtly seeming</span><span>such overweening pride,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he'll do us a mischief,—</span><span>of that I'm sore afraid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If once we go a-wooing</span><span>this fair and stately maid."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Shall that be hindrance to us?"</span><span>asked Siegfried, fearlessly.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"If what I ask in kindness</span><span>he venture to deny.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My strong right hand shall win it!</span><span>I'll wrest from him," quoth he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Both land and lieges, surely,</span><span>for all his subtlety."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the royal Siegmund,</span><span>"I do mislike thy speech!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should tidings thereof ever</span><span>to the Rhine-border reach,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thou durst not ever after</span><span>into that country ride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Long have I known King Gunther,</span><span>and King Gernot beside.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"By force can never any</span><span>expect to win the maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Declared the good King Siegmund;</span><span>"that hath been always said!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But if thou with thy warriors</span><span>wilt to her country ride,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>An' we have any friends left,</span><span>Til call them to thy side."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Far be it from my purpose,"</span><span>cried Siegfried, eagerly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That when I ride to Rhine-land</span><span>warriors should follow me,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Like an invading army!</span><span>I should abhor this thing—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By force the glorious maiden</span><span>into my arms to bring!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I will not owe her winning</span><span>to any other hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I and eleven others</span><span>will ride to Gunther's land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your help, good father Siegmund,</span><span>I, for this purpose, pray."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then gave they to his warriors</span><span>both coloured stuffs and gray.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His mother heard the tidings,</span><span>the lady Siegelind,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She fell to grieving over</span><span>her dear son in her mind;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Fearing lest she might lose him</span><span>through some of Gunther's men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble queen refrained not</span><span>from bitter weeping then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This seeing, young lord Siegfried</span><span>to her his way did make,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And unto his dear mother</span><span>thus tenderly he spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I prithee weep not, lady,</span><span>because of mine intent;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I have no fear of foemen,</span><span>nor of disparagement.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Aid thou me in my journey</span><span>to the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I and my companions</span><span>may bravely furnished stand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In raiment that shall honour</span><span>proud heroes, such as we,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then will I for this favour,</span><span>aye thank thee fervently."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Since thou wilt not forego it,"</span><span>did Siegelind declare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"ril help thee on thy journey,</span><span>my only son and heir!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I will provide apparel,</span><span>the best e'er warrior wore,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For thee and thy companions:</span><span>and ye must take good store."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then bowed to the queen-mother</span><span>Prince Siegfried, theyoung man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He said: " On this my journey</span><span>I'll take, if so I can,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>None save eleven warriors;</span><span>for these be raiment made.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I long to see how fares it</span><span>with Kriemhilda," he said.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So Sieglind's beauteous ladies</span><span>sat stitching, night and day,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There were no idle fingers,</span><span>and little rest or play,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until Prince Siegfried's raiment</span><span>was ready to his hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He'd not forego his journey</span><span>to the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>His father bade him polish</span><span>his knightly harness grand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wherewith he meant to ride out</span><span>of royal Siegmund's land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke the glitt'ring hauberks</span><span>they likewise did prepare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Together with stout helmets,</span><span>and bucklers broad and fair.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The hour of their departure</span><span>for Burgundy was nigh.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And men as well as women</span><span>watched them forebodingly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest they again should never</span><span>come to their fatherland.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To pack their gear and armour</span><span>the heroes gave command.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their chargers were resplendent,</span><span>their trappings of red gold;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No knight could well be prouder</span><span>nor had more right to hold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A high head, than Sir Siegfried</span><span>and his eleven men.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He craved the king's permission</span><span>to gallop Rhinewards then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With grief Siegmund and Sieglind</span><span>accorded his request;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom Siegfried sought to comfort,</span><span>as tenderly he pressed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He said: " Ye must not weep now</span><span>through any care for me;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And fear not lest my life be</span><span>in any jeopardy."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sad-hearted were the warriors,</span><span>and many a maiden wept:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Doubtless their hearts foreboded</span><span>mischance for those who leapt</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That day into the saddle,—</span><span>they dreamt these friends lay dead,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They had good cause for mourning,</span><span>in sooth there was much need</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the seventh morning,</span><span>at Worms, on the Rhine shore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Arrived the gallant horsemen;</span><span>the raiment that they wore</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With ruddy gold was flashing,</span><span>and all their trappings shone:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The chargers of bold Siegfried</span><span>went pacing smoothly on.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their bucklers were new-wrought ones,</span><span>and light and broadbeside,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And bright their helmets glittered,</span><span>as unto court did ride</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried, the gallant chieftain,</span><span>in royal Gunther's land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such firie-apparelled heroes</span><span>were ne'er seen on that strand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Their long-swords' points hung downwards</span><span>unto the spurs they wore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And sharp, too, were the javelins</span><span>which these bold heroes bore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The one that Siegfried carried</span><span>was two spans in the blade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Its twofold edge was deadly,</span><span>and ghastly wounds it made.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All gilded were the bridles</span><span>they lightly held in hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And silken were their horse-girths;</span><span>so came they to that land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The folk began on all sides</span><span>on them to gape and stare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then many of Gunther's people</span><span>ran forth to meet them there.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Those high and mighty warriors,</span><span>and knight as well as squire,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Went out to bid them welcome,</span><span>as honour did require,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Receiving them with kindness</span><span>into their master's land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Taking their horses, straightway,</span><span>and bucklers from their hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They would have ta'en the chargers,</span><span>and led them to the stall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had not the gallant Siegfried</span><span>said out, before them all:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Let mine and my men's horses</span><span>stay here, as now they be,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It is my will and purpose</span><span>to ride hence presently!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I pray you therefore tell me—</span><span>whoever knows this thing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let him not hide it from me—</span><span>where I can find your king,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Gunther, the mighty monarch</span><span>of the Burgundian land? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then one among them told him,</span><span>who knew where he did stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If you would find King Gunther,</span><span>'tis easy done, I trow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In yonder hall I saw him,</span><span>and thither you must go;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He stands among his heroes;</span><span>and, if you'll thither wend.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many a glorious warrior</span><span>you'll find with him, good friend! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the king the tidings</span><span>by this time had been told:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How warriors were arrived</span><span>all gallant to behold,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who wore white, ghtt'ring mail-shirts,</span><span>and raiment rich and grand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And no one knew aught of them,</span><span>in that Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then was the king astonished,</span><span>and much he did inquire,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whence came these splendid warriors,</span><span>in dazzling bright attire,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with such well- wrought bucklers,</span><span>so new and eke so broad;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It vexed the soul of Gunther</span><span>that none could give him word.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Ortwein, lord of Metz, spake,</span><span>and answered thus the king</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(Rich and high-couraged was he,</span><span>and feared not anything):</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Since we know naught about them,</span><span>bid someone straightway go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And fetch my uncle Hagen,</span><span>he'll see them, and may know.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"He knoweth all the kingdoms,</span><span>and ev'ry stranger-land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If aught he wot anent them,</span><span>he'll make us understand."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So the king sent to fetch him,</span><span>him and his liegemen all ;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They watched his stately coming,</span><span>with warriors, to the hall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>What the king wanted of him?</span><span>first, Hagen sought to know.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"There are within my palace</span><span>strange warriors, I trow,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom not a soul here knoweth;</span><span>if thou didst them e'er see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Declare it now, Sir Hagen,</span><span>and tell the truth to me! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"That will I," answered Hagen,</span><span>and to the window went j</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw his keen glance wander,</span><span>till on the guests it bent.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Well pleased him their equipment,</span><span>and raiment equally:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But they were strangers to him,</span><span>ne'er seen in Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " From whencesoever</span><span>have come these cavaliers,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They must themselves be princes,</span><span>or princes' messengers.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their raiment is so splendid,</span><span>their horses are so good;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Tis plain, where'er they come from,</span><span>they are of noble blood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>' And," furthermore said Hagen,</span><span>"though hitherto, I ween</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The famous hero Siegfried,</span><span>mine eyes have never seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I cannot help believing,</span><span>how strange soe'er it be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That yon proud knight, there standing,</span><span>can be none else but he!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"He bringeth us new tidings,</span><span>here into this our land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The hardy Niblungs slew he</span><span>with his own hero-hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both Nibelung and Schilbung,</span><span>the sons of a rich king.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He hath wrought mighty wonders,</span><span>by sheer strength vanquishing.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"For riding once, all lonely,</span><span>and with no help at hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He came unto a mountain,</span><span>(as I did understand,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where lay the Niblungs' treasure,</span><span>well watched by doughty men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who all were strangers to him,</span><span>until he met them then.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The treasure of the Niblungs</span><span>had just been taken then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Out of a hollow mountain,—</span><span>(Now hearken, my good men!)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While as the Niblung warriors</span><span>to share it did prepare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Young Siegfried came, and saw them:</span><span>and had good cause to stare.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"He came so nigh unto them</span><span>that he could see them all,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And they did also see him;—</span><span>then one of them did call:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>' Here comes the mighty Siegfried,</span><span>the Netherlander strong!'</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He met with strange adventures</span><span>the Nibelungs among.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The knight was well received by</span><span>Schilbung and Nibelung;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with one voice in counsel</span><span>those noble lords and young</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Cried: ' Share for us the treasure,</span><span>thou honourable man! '</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eagerly besought him:</span><span>so he to share began.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"He saw so many jewels</span><span>as I have heard men say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That fivescore waggons scarcely</span><span>would carry them away;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet more there was of red gold,</span><span>from out the Nib'lungs' land:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all must be divided</span><span>by gallant Siegfried's hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And unto him for wages</span><span>they gave the Niblungs' sword:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But little they foreboded</span><span>what would be their reward</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For rendering this service</span><span>to Siegfried, the good knight;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere he could end the sharing</span><span>they had begun to fight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"They had their friends anear them,</span><span>twelve gallant armed men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who all were mighty giants,—</span><span>but what availed them then?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For Siegfried fell upon them</span><span>and slew them in his ire,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full seven hundred Niblungs,</span><span>vanquished in battle dire,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"With their good sword resistless,</span><span>that was yclept ' Balmung.'</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And through the mighty terror</span><span>that seized those warriors young,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dread of the sword, and hero</span><span>who bravely did it wield;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their land and eke their castles</span><span>unto him did they yield.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The wealthy kings he also</span><span>smote, till they both fell dead.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But he himself, through Albrich,</span><span>was grievously bested,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who would avenge his masters</span><span>upon the spot,—till he</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Found the great strength of Siegfried</span><span>beyond his mastery.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The sturdy dwarf was powerless</span><span>against him in the fray.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Like lions wild to the mountain</span><span>they twain then broke away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till the Tarnhelm from Albrich</span><span>he wrested; and thus lord</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Became the dreaded Siegfried</span><span>of all the Niblung hoard.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"They who had dared the battle</span><span>there, one and all, lay slain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then bade he that the treasure</span><span>be carried back again</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the cave, whence erstwhile</span><span>the Niblungs did it take.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then did he stout Albrich</span><span>his treasure-keeper make.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"By a great oath he made him</span><span>unto him fealty swear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To serve him in all service,</span><span>no matter when or where."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So spake Hagen of Tronje,</span><span>"That did he presently:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"There never was a warrior</span><span>who had such might as he!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And yet another story</span><span>of Siegfried I have heard:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How he did slay a dragon,</span><span>with his own hand and sword,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And in its blood he bathed him</span><span>till horny grew his skin,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thus no sword can cut him,</span><span>as hath been often seen.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Then let us this young hero</span><span>receive as best we may.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest we deserve his hatred</span><span>and have to rue the day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He is of such bold spirit</span><span>'twere best to be his friend:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He hath, by his strong right hand,</span><span>wrought wonders without end."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then the great king said,</span><span>"Truly, methinks that thou art right.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>See but how chivalrously</span><span>he stands prepared to fight,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He and his warriors with him,</span><span>a dauntless man is he!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We will go down to meet him,</span><span>and greet him courteously."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Thou mayest," answered Hagen,</span><span>"with honour do this thing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His ancestry is noble,</span><span>his sire a wealthy king.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One sees it in his bearing,—</span><span>and, by the dear Lord Christ,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It is no trifle brings him,</span><span>I warrant, on this quest!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the country's ruler:</span><span>"Right welcome let him be,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he is brave and noble</span><span>hath aye been told to me;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We'll make his sojourn merry</span><span>in our Burgundian land."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So saying, down went Gunther</span><span>to where Siegfried did stand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The host and all his warriors</span><span>received the guest so well</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That nothing to good breeding</span><span>was lacking, sooth to tell.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The goodly man, on his side,</span><span>bowed low before them there,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thanked them for their greeting,</span><span>so friendly and so fair.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I marvel at these riddles,"</span><span>spake Gunther, suddenly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Whence have you, noble Siegfried,</span><span>come unto this country?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And for what purpose come you</span><span>to Worms upon the Rhine?"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The guest unto the king said:</span><span>"To answer shall be mine.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"To me were told the tidings,</span><span>erst in my fatherland,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That here with you were dwelling</span><span>(which I would know firsthand,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The boldest of all warriors—</span><span>oft said they so to me,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ever monarch governed:</span><span>lo, I am come to see!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Thy fame hath also reached me;</span><span>I hear the knights declare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That never king was bolder</span><span>nor braver, anywhere.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such is the common folk-talk</span><span>o'er all the land, in sooth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I shall have no quiet</span><span>until I know the truth.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"I also am a warrior,</span><span>and shall too wear a crown;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I shall ne'er content me</span><span>until I win renown.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the folk say of me,</span><span>that I have proved my right</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To reign o'er land and people:</span><span>my honour do I plight</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And head thereto. And wert thou</span><span>as bold as some men say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I will now wrestle from thee</span><span>whatever is thine to-day;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I care not who gainsay it,</span><span>or who may like, or hate:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thy broad lands and thy castles</span><span>shall mine be, soon or late! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The king did greatly marvel,</span><span>and eke his liegemen all,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At the strange declaration</span><span>that from his lips did fall:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To take his kingdom from him!</span><span>so that was his intent!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His thanes all heard it, likewise,</span><span>and fierce was their dissent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Whereby have I deserved this?"</span><span>Gunther the warrior cried,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"That lands my father governed,</span><span>with honour, till he died,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should be now wrested from us</span><span>by force, by whomsoe'er?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That were to prove but poorly</span><span>that we too knighthood bear."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Nought else will I," quoth Siegfried,</span><span>"by that I fall or stand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If thy strength cannot peace win</span><span>for thine own fatherland,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then shall my strong hand rule it,</span><span>and after me mine heir;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If thou dost win, thine be it,</span><span>and we thy rule must bear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Thy heritage, mine also,</span><span>are now alike at stake;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whichever of the other</span><span>shall wholly conquest make</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To him shall all be subject,—</span><span>the land and all its folk."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Hagen and King Gernot</span><span>in hasty answer spoke;</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Far be it from our purpose,"</span><span>spake Gernot presently,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"To conquer new possessions,</span><span>and to cause death thereby</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At hands of heroes; truly,</span><span>we have a rich estate:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which pays us due allegiance,</span><span>nor seeks a better fate."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Round and about were standing</span><span>his friends, in sullen mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lord of Metz, Sir Ortwein,</span><span>among the others stood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: " This friendly parley</span><span>doth vex me sore, as knight,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Stout Siegfried unprovoked hath</span><span>here challenged you to fight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If you and your two brethren</span><span>were here, without defence,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And if he brought against you</span><span>the army of a prince,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Methinks I could o'ermaster</span><span>yea, e'en such doughty one!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And force this haughty warrior</span><span>to change his braggart tone."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This saying stirred fierce anger</span><span>in him of Netherland.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He spake: "Ne'er shalt thou measure</span><span>against my like thine hand!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I am a mighty king's son,</span><span>and thou but a king's knight:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Twelve such as thou art could not</span><span>withstand me in the fight!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwein, the lord of Metz, then</span><span>for swords called, lustily;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Hagen, lord of Tronje,</span><span>the sister's son was he;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he had held his peace still</span><span>seemed not to Gunther right.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Gernot put his word in,</span><span>the bold and ready knight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He thus spake unto Ortwein:</span><span>"Now let thine anger be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegfried hath not yet done us</span><span>aught evil that I see,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Our difference in goodwill</span><span>we yet may end, I deem.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thus may gain his friendship;</span><span>'twill better us beseem."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the doughty Hagen:</span><span>"Well do we to be wrath.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Both we, and all thy warriors,</span><span>for hath he not come forth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Here to the Rhine, to flout us?</span><span>he might have let that be!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>My own good lords had never</span><span>done him such injury."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To this made answer Siegfried,</span><span>that mightiest of men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"If what I now have spoken</span><span>offend you. Sir Hagen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>You shall have eye-proof, shortly,</span><span>how this my strong right hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Shall do great deeds of prowess</span><span>in this Burgundian land."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"That I, for one, will hinder!"</span><span>Gernot in answer said,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And unto all his warriors</span><span>insulting speech forbade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Because such speech did grieve him.</span><span>Then into Siegfried's head</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Came thoughts of Lady Kriemhild,</span><span>the lovely, peerless maid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Is not all strife unseemly</span><span>between us?" Gernot said;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"However many heroes</span><span>fell by our prowess dead,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Small honour would by us be,</span><span>by you small vantage won."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then answered him Prince Siegfried,</span><span>the royal Siegmund's son:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Wherefore delayeth Hagen?</span><span>and Ortwein, what doth he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he and his companions</span><span>haste not to strive with me?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>(Whereof he hath a' many</span><span>e'en here in Burgundy)."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But it was Gernot's counsel</span><span>that none should risk reply.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"You shall be welcome to us,"</span><span>continued Ute's son;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"You and the knightly comrades</span><span>who come with you, each one;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right gladly will we serve you,</span><span>I and these kinsmen mine."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then for the guests were ordered</span><span>goblets of Gunther's wine.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Loud spake the country's ruler:</span><span>"All that we have is yours,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What ye desire, in honour,</span><span>we'll call no longer ours.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But gladly share it with you,</span><span>be it or wealth, or blood."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This wrought in good Sir Siegfried</span><span>a somewhat softer mood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The knights were soon relieved</span><span>of all the gear they brought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And lodgment was found for them,—</span><span>the very best was sought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For Siegfried's knightly followers;</span><span>well were they lodged that day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now, in all Burgundia,</span><span>right welcome guests were they.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>All honour too was shown them,</span><span>on that and many a day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A thousand times more honour</span><span>than I can ever say!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This had his boldness gained him;</span><span>and this is true I state:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That seldom any saw him</span><span>who long could bear him hate.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On pastimes now and pleasure</span><span>the kings and court were set.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But, whatsoe'er they started,</span><span>he outstript all men yet:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For none could equal Siegfried,</span><span>nor come his strength anear,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whether it were stone-putting,</span><span>or shooting with the spear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And when by courtly custom</span><span>they will'd their games to play</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In presence of the ladies,—</span><span>these knights of humour gay,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Approving glances followed</span><span>the prince of Netherland.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet his heart brooded ever</span><span>on loftier love, at hand.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Though to whate'er was passing</span><span>he lent a ready mind.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One gracious maiden ever</span><span>he in his heart did find;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So, likewise, did the damsel,</span><span>whom yet he had not seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Incline to him in secret,</span><span>and talk of him, I ween.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When in the court the young folk</span><span>their warlike games began,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The knights and their attendants,</span><span>Kriemhilda straightway ran</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And watched them from the window,</span><span>king's daughter tho' she were,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Nor while it lasted did she</span><span>for other pastime care.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And had he known she watched him,</span><span>whom in his heart he bore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It had been ample pleasure,—</span><span>he would have asked no more.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And could his eyes have seen her,</span><span>ye need not to be told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No better bliss and greater</span><span>for him this world could hold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When he, among the heroes,</span><span>down in the court-yard stood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Between the games, at leisure,</span><span>as other warriors would;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So winsomely he stood there,</span><span>Queen Siegelinda's son,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That the heart's love of many</span><span>a noble dame he won.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And many a time he pondered:</span><span>"How shall I e'er attain</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To see the noble damsel,</span><span>whose love I seek to gain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her whom I love so dearly,</span><span>and have for many a day?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To me she's still a stranger,</span><span>with sorrow I must say."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whene'er the kings were minded</span><span>to ride throughout their land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their vassal knights had ever</span><span>to follow, close at hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Siegfried must be with them,</span><span>which did the maid distress,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he too suffered often,</span><span>for her dear sake, no less.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So dwelt he with the three kings</span><span>(and 'tis all true you hear,)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In Gunther's court and country,</span><span>the space of one whole year;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all that time his Lady</span><span>he never saw at all.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Through whom much love unto him</span><span>and sorrow did befall.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
