<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-35" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXXV.— HOW IRING WAS SLAIN.</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thereon the margrave Iring, who came from Denmark, cried :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" I have in all my doings on honour long relied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the people's battles oft gain'd the mastery :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now bring to me my weapons ; Hagen I will defy ! "</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" 'Gainst that will I take counsel," Hagen in answer cried ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>*' So bid these Hunnish warriors stand further yet aside ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If two or three among ye should rush into this hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back down the stairs disabled I'll send them, one and all ! "</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" For that I'll not forego it," said Iring, answering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>*' I have ere this attempted as troublesome a thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sword in hand against thee I'll hold my own alone ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What boots thy haughty bearing that thou in words hast shown ? "</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then quickly in his armour thane Iring was y-clad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Irnfried of Thuringia, a bold and gallant lad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke the stalwart Haward, with full a thousand men ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever part was Iring's, that would they all maintain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fiddler saw them coming — a very host they were —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In arms along with Iring, to set upon him there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On head, well-fasten' d, wore they right many a helmet good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wax'd the gallant Volker wrathful enough in mood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Now dost thou see, friend Hagen, how Iring yonder goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who swore that thee in sword-fight he singly would oppose ?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth falsehood fit a hero ? Him I misprize therefore ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He brings with him in armour a thousand men or more ! "</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Now call me not a liar," the liege of Haward said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>*' I'm ready to accomplish what I have promised ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fear of no man living will I my word disown ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How dread so e'er be Hagen, I'll stand to him alone."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Iring begg'd his kinsmen and followers, at their feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they would let him singly in fight the warrior meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwillingly they yielded, for well enough to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was known the haughty Hagen, firom Burgundy who came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet he so long besought them, that 'twas at last agreed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when his people saw him so bent upon the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that he strove for honour, they could but let him go ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereon a grim encounter befell betwixt the two.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Iring, the thane of Denmark, aloft his javelin bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held his shield before him, that noble knight and rare ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then up the steps to Hagen before the hall he ran :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amongst the thanes assembled a fearful din began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from their hands the lances they forward hurl'd with might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right through the strong-bound bucklers upon the harness bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the broken spear-shafts were whirl'd high in the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then clutch'd they at their broadswords that grim and gallant pair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The strength of doughty Hagen it was a mighty thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Iring's blows upon him made all the house to ring ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From palace and from turret echo'd their strokes again :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet naught avail'd the warrior his will on him to gain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Iring tum'd from Hagen and left him scatheless yet ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the fiddle-player forthwith himself he set.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him, with his sturdy sword-strokes he thought he^might compel ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these the well-skill'd chieftain knew how to parry well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then smote the fiddler sorely, till o'er the buckler's side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Volker's hand the plating was scatter 'd far and wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was he fain to leave him, a grewsome man was he ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Iring rush'd on Gunther, the lord of Burgundy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And stout enough for combat was either of them made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howe'er on one another Gunther and Iring laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither could wound the other to draw a drop of blood ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that their armour saved them, so strong it was and good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eke Gunther left he standing and on to Gemot ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote till from his hauberk the sparks to fly began ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the sturdy Gemot, the knight of Burgundy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dealt on gallant Iring that he was like to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from this prince he hurried — swift-footed was he too —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And four of the Burgundians the hero quickly slew ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All noble court retainers from Worms-on-Rhine they were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wrath could ne'er be greater than that of Giselher.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Now, by the Lord ! Sir Iring," cried Giselher the lad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" For these thou needs must pay me who lie before thee dead —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thee this moment slaughter'd ; " then ran on him straight-way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote the knight of Denmark so that he needs must stay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beneath his hands succumbing down fell he in the blood ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all were well persuaded that now the hero good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne'er more would wield a weapon in battle anywhere :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Iring lay unwounded in front of Giselher.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From blows upon the helmet and clashing of the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wits were sorely stricken and scatter'd all abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the gallant warrior of life took no more thought :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This by his strength of body bold Giselher had wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When from his head the numbness at last began to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which had erstwhile come on him from that o'erwhelming blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought he : "I still am living, nor wounded anywhere ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now know I for the first time the strength of Giselher."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On one side and the other his enemies heard he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they his case aware of the worse for him 'twould be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And likewise had he noted that Giselher was by :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ponder'd how 'twas likely he might these foemen fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How madly then upsprang he from out that bloody stew !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his ready fleetness his thanks were surely due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the place forth rush'd he, but there saw Hagen stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote upon him swiftly with all his might of hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to himself thought Hagen : " Death thee for this must have !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the devil help thee, thyself thou canst not save."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Iring through the helmet a wound on Hagen made :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This did the knight with Vaske, that was so good a blade.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No sooner felt Sir Hagen the smarting of the wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than terribly his weapon he whirl'd in hand around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthwith must Haward's liegeman for safety flee again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hagen down the stairway to follow him was fain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Above his head bold Iring his shield made haste to lean ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if that self-same stairway yet thrice its length had been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hagen had ne'er allow'd him to deal a single stroke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay me ! the sparks so ruddy that from his helmet broke !</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet back unto his people Iring in safety won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then soon unto Kriemhilda the tidings were made known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he had wrought in battle on Hagen of Tronje;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which her thanks right hearty the queen began to say :</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Now God reward thee, Iring, a hero good thou art ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much hast thou me encouraged and comforted my heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, now on Hagen's raiment all red with blood I look ! "</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her own hand Kriemhilda his shield, in kindness, took.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"So much you need not thank him," quoth Hagen ; "if again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me he'd try his fortune, it would beseem the thane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ever thence return'd he, a valiant man he'd be !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wound will serve you little that he hath given to me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" That you have seen my hauberk by blood of mine made red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the death of many hath me embittered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against that liege of Haward's I have the utmost wrath ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit the warrior Iring hath done me little scathe."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the man of Denmark into the wind had gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cool him in his hauberk — his helmet off was done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the folk were saying his prowess was right good ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby they made the margrave exceeding bold of mood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then presently spake Iring : " My friends, now mark ye well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye must arm me quickly : I'll try another spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that o'erbearing tyrant I yet may bring to book."</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shield was hack'd to pieces : a better one he took.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Full speedily the warrior was better arm'd than e'er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A javelin right sturdy with hate in heart he bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith once more with Hagen he purposed there to fight ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With foe-like mien awaited for him that murderous wight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But brook'd not the thane Hagen to stay for his advance ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ran full speed towards him, with blows of sword and lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he reach'd the stairs' foot , his wrath was fierce and dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the strength of Iring stood him in little stead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They slash'd right through the bucklers, till each of them began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ruddy fire to sparkle. And ere long Haward's man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the broadsword of Hagen was desperately smit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through shield and armour : never mote he get well of it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When that the chieftain Iring was of the wound aware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shield unto his helm-band he raised, to rest it there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought that with this damage he now had got his fill :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The liegeman of King Gunther had more to give him still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Before his feet did Hagen a javelin espy ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with it straight at Iring, the Danish chief, let fly, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So well, that from his forehead the shaft thereof stuck out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him the warrior Hagen a cruel end had wrought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Iring must needs betake him the Danish folk unto ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ere they loosed the helmet from off the chief, they drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out from his head the lance-shaft; then death to him came nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His kinsfolk all were wailing : well might they, verily.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then came the queen towards him, and over him she leant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the stalwart Iring gave to her sorrow vent ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wept, his wounds beholding, and bitter was her grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spake unto his kinsmen that brave and gallant chief:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" I pray thee stint thy weeping, most noble lady mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what avails thy sorrow ? I must my life resign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because of wounds and damage that have been dealt on me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more will death allow me Etzel to serve and thee."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then unto the Thuringians and to the Danes he spake :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" The gifts that ye were promised no hand of yours shall take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From yonder royal lady, — her ruddy gold so bright !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death's visage must ye look on, if ye with Hagen fight."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All pallid was his colour, the seal of death he bore, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ever-valiant Iring, — to them 'twas sorrow sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Haward's gallant liegeman there was no hope of life :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so the men of Denmark must forward go to strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Irnfried as well as Haward sprang forth the hall before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With warriors a thousand ; a horrible uproar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every side resounded, mighty and clamouring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ah, at the Burgundians what lances sharp they fling !</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the gallant Irnfried straight for the minstrel made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At whose right hand redoubted great injury he had.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lo, the noble fiddler the landgrave sore did smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through firmly-fasten'd helmet : he was a grewsome wight !</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thereupon Sir Irnfried the valiant minstrel smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till rents perforce were riven across his ring-wrought coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his breast-plate quiver'd with sparks of fiery red ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit fell the landgrave before the fiddler dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anon were met together Haward and Hagen bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wot that whoso saw them a marvel might behold !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hand of either hero the sword-strokes follow'd free ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foredoom'd to die was Haward by him of Burgundy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Danesmen and Thuringians their leaders saw in death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then rose a frightful struggle the palace walls beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever they the gateway by might and main had won :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a shield and helmet were shattered and fordone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Give way!" then shouted Volker, "and let them all come through —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What they would fain accomplish they can in nowise do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In but a short time after they're bound to die within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what the queen hath promised by dying they can win."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when these haughty chieftains within the chamber went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many a one amongst them the head was lowly bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by their rapid sword-blows to perish he was fain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well fought the gallant Gemot, and Giselher the thane.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There got within the palace a thousand men and four ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One saw their flashing falchions as through the air they tore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all who came within it soon every warrior fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One might of the Burgundians full many a marvel tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereafter was a silence, and all the uproar died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, out of hole and crevice, blood flow'd on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ran into the gutters from all the corpses there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus had the men of Rhineland wrought by their prowess rare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then sat they down to rest them, those men of Burgundy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their weapons and their bucklers they presently laid by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet still the gallant fiddler before the palace stay'd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In case that any other to fight with him essay'd.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The king lamented sorely, as likewise did his wife :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maids and matrons also aweary were of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ween that Death had taken an oath to do them ill :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence, by the guests to perish were many warriors still.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
