<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 39</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-39" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXXIX.— HOW GUNTHER AND HAGEN AND KRIEMHILDA WERE SLAIN.</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Then for himself Lord Dietrich sought out a suit to wear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Master Hildebrand help'd him to don his fighting gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sore was the lamenting made by the stalwart man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the house to echo with his loud voice began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But quickly he recover'd a fitting hero's mood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grimly was his armour donn'd by that warrior good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shield compact right firmly he carried in his hand ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then straightway forth he sallied with Master Hildebrand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spake Hagen, lord of Tronje : " I see there, drawing nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble warrior Dietrich ; for that great injury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That here hath him befallen, he will upon us set.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This day 'twill be discover'd who doth the honours get.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Ay ! to himself Lord Dietrich of Bern doth think that ne'er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His like, so strong of body and terrible there were !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should he for our doings a reckoning demand,"</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Hagen spake : *' against him I dare right well to stand."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They heard the words of Hagen, — Dietrich and Hildebrand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came to where the warriors had taken both their stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the house, together, leaning against the hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His goodly shield had Dietrich upon its rim let fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Dietrich spake in answer, grievously sorrowing :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" Why hast thou done in this wise, O Gunther, mighty king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me who am a stranger ? to thee what had I done ?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All comfort that was left me is now for ever gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" With that great deed of vengeance ye were not yet content</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Riideger the hero to bloody death you sent :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now have ye taken from me my liegemen everyone ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah ! never to your heroes would I such scathe have done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>*' Now of yourselves be mindful, and of your own distress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The death of friends and kinsfolk, your toil and weariness ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth it not weigh upon you, good warriors, heavily ?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas, the death of Riideger is bitterness to me !</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"In this world never happen'd such woe to anyone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye took but ill account of my sorrow and your own ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By you of all its pleasures my life henceforth is shorn ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In truth I cannot ever my kinsfolk cease to mourn."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" In sooth," then answer'd Hagen, " So guilty are we not ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For verily your heroes came marching to this spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-arm'd, for some set purpose, in such large company :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you methinks the story was not told truthfully."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Vv iat else should I believe then? 'twas said by Hildebrand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when my knights besought you — the men of Amelungland —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thai; you would give them Riideger from out the palace-hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naught else but jibes you offer'd to these bold heroes all."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the king of Rhineland : " They did their wish avow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence Riideger to carry ; that would I not allow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do despite to Etzel, and not to cross your men :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Wolfhart words unhandsome began to utter then."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answer'd him the hero of Bern, " So let it be !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Gunther, noble sovran, now of thy courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repay me for the sorrow that of thy doing came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make, bold knight, atonement, that I confirm the same.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Give up thyself as hostage, thou and thy liegeman there ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I myself will guard ye with all my greatest care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest any of the Hunfolk should do ye aught of ill ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In me thou shalt find nothing save faith and all goodwill."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Hagen spake in answer : " Now God in Heaven forfend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That any pair of warriors themselves to thee should bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who arm'd as yet so stoutly here stand before thine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still are all unfetter'd to face their enemies."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>*' Beware, Gunther and Hagen," then Dietrich answer made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>*' How ye refuse my offer ! ye twain on me have laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sore a load of sorrow — on heart and spirit too ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye amends will make me, that may ye cheaply do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I give you my true promise, and pledge it with my hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I myself will with you ride home unto your land ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I'll guide you in all honour, or will myself be slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will, the while I serve you, forget my bitter pain."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Now think thereon no longer," Hagen in answer bade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" 'Twere not a fitting story about us to be said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That two such doughty warriors had bow'd to your demand :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One sees beside you standing no one save Hildebrand."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then upspake Master Hildebrand : " Sir Hagen, God doth know, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing that one hath offer'd to make a peace with you, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hour is nigh when fitly the offer you might take :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peace my lord proposes 'twere well for you to make."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>rd sooner make atonement," in answer Hagen said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" Ere in such coward fashion from any place I fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou hast done but lately, good Master Hildebrand !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Methought against a foeman thou couldst more boldly stanc^.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Hildebrand made answer : " Why taunt'st thou me therefor ?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sat upon his buckler the Vaske-rock before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While friends of his so many the Spanish Walther slew ?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About thyself in plenty are things that one might shew."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake the noble Dietrich : " It fits not heroes good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rail at one another as any old wives would.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You, Hildebrand, forbid I to wrangle any more :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me, a homeless warrior, are weighing troubles sore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" Come let us hear, Sir Hagen," to him spake Dietrich then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>"What was it ye were saying, ye ready warriors twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first ye saw me coming to you in armour dight ?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye vow'd that ye against me would singly stand in fight."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" That no man will deny you," thane Hagen made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" And with some sturdy sword-strokes here fam am I to try, —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the blade of Niblung within my hand should break :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wroth am I that you purpose us two in pledge to take."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Dietrich thus had hearken'd to savage Hagen's mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly his shield uplifted that gallant thane and good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How swiftly Hagen toward him down from the stairway sprang !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goodly sword of Niblung loudly on Dietrich rang.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then well the noble Dietrich knew that the valiant man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right ruthless was in humour. The lord of Bern began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against this deadly onset to guard himself aright ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him well known was Hagen, that all-accomplish'd knight</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dread, too, had he of Balmung, a potent sword enow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From time to time yet Dietrich gave back a wily blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until at last, in fighting, Hagen o'ermaster'd he :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single wound he dealt him ; 'twas deep and long to see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bethought him then Lord Dietrich : " Thou'rt weaken'd by the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should have little honour were I to take thy life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner will I make trial, if I may thee compel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be to me a hostage." With trouble this befell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He let his shield fall downwards — great was his strength of limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Tronian Hagen clasp'd he close in his arms to him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus was captive taken by him that gallant man ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereat the noble Gunther sorely to grieve began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Dietrich led forth Hagen, fast bound, to where her stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble queen had taken ; and gave into her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boldest of all warriors that ever weapon bare ; —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had she joy in plenty for all her bitter care.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For thanks the wife of Etzel unto the thane bent low :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>** In heart and eke in body for ever blest be thou !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hast thou well repaid me for my unhappy lot ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this I'll ever serve thee if death prevent me not."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then answer'd the Lord Dietrich : " His life thou e'en must spare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O noble queen ! Then haply thou mayst become aware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How well he will atone for all he hath done to thee !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must no whit be worsen'd, that him in bonds ye see."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She bade them carry Hagen to durance vile away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there imprison'd straitly unseen of men he lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gunther the noble sovran aloud began to cry :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" Where went that chief of Bern ? He hath done me injury."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then presently to meet him the noble Dietrich came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great was the might of Gunther, and well 'twas known to fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did he tarry longer ; — before the hall he ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their two weapons' meeting a dreadful din began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Albeit that Lord Dietrich great fame long time had had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sore was Gunther's anger he raved like one gone mad ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For deadly foe he held him, so bitter was his pain :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>'Tis reckon'd still a marvel that Dietrich was not slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So strong and full of valour was either of the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace walls and turrets rang with their blows again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While on the goodly helmets with swords they hack'd and hew'd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, verily, King Gunther, a royal courage shew'd.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet he of Bern o'ercame him, as likewise he had done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Hagen ; through the hauberk the hero's blood to run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was seen, from that sharp weapon wherewith Sir Dietrich clove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, weary as was Gunther, he valiantly strove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bound was the noble chieftain by Dietrich's hand alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although a king should never such bonds have undergone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought if he should leave them, the king and vassal, free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all on whom they lighted by them fordone must be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dietrich of Bern then took him a captive, closely-bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the hand he led him where he Kriemhilda found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sight of his affliction her sorrows greatly waned ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spake : " Be welcome, Gunther, of the Burgundian land !"</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake : " I needs must thank thee, most noble sister mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I would fain a greeting more gracious have than thine !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O queen, well do I know thee, how wrathful is thy mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that for me and Hagen thou hast no greeting good."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of Bern then spake the hero : "Never, most noble queen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knights of such fair demeanour, your hostages have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As these, most gracious lady, whom now to you I give :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See that ye let the strangers for my sake safely live."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She vow'd to do it gladly : so the Lord Dietrich came —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes with tears o'erflowing — from those two chiefs of fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon vengeance sore upon them was wreak'd by Etzel's wife :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of both these chosen warriors she took away the life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her evil mood obeying, apart she made them lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That neither on the other from that time forth set eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until in front of Hagen her brother's head she laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On both of them Kriemhilda her vengeance well repaid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For first the queen betook her where she might Hagen see :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake unto the warrior, — how full of enmity !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" What thou from me hast taken if thou again wilt give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then home thou yet mayst journey to Burgundy alive."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Hagen grim made answer : " You throw your words away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most noble queen, for truly I've sworn, and now I say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treasure I will show not, so long as either one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be living of my masters ; — I'll yield it up to none."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>"Then will I end the matter !" so spake the noble wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forthwith bade her liegemen to take her brother's life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They struck his head from off him, which by the hair she bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Tronian hero ; then was his grief full sore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For when, with sorrow stricken, he saw his master's head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereon unto Kriemhilda the warrior spake and said :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>" E'en as thou saidst, the matter thou hast to ending brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And likewise all hath happen'd as I beforehand thought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>" And now the noble sovran of Burgundy is not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Giselher the stripling, and eke the Lord Gemot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None knoweth of the treasure save God and me alone :</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unto thee, she-devil, it never shall be known ! "</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Said she : " An evil guerdon dost thou to me award ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in mine own possession I will have Siegfried's sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which my beloved husband, when last I saw him, bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day when, by your doing, began my heartfelt care."</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She drew it from the scabbard — he could not hinder her —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of his life bethought her to rid that warrior.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both her hands she swung it, and smote his head right off:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Etzel saw her do it, his grief was sore enough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prince cried : " Woe betide me, lo ! now, how here is slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by a woman's doing, the very noblest thane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ever came to battle, or ever buckler bore !</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit I was his foeman I could not sorrow more I "</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Hildebrand cried : "Truly she shall no gainer be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she hath dared to slay him ! Whate'er befalleth me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although myself but lately to direst straits he brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this brave Tronian's murder I'll yet have vengeance wrought '</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Hildebrand right wrathful upon Kriemhilda leapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the queen with broadsword a heavy stroke he swept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, Hildebrand she dreaded with sore anxiety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what could it avail her to shriek thus horribly?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The bodies of the slaughter'd were lying all around ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the noble lady lay mangled on the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dietrich along with Etzel fell bitterly to weep ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For kinsmen and for lieges they mourn'd in sorrow deep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There mickle pride and honour in death dishonour'd lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people all were stricken with pity and dismay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sorrowing was ended the king's high festival —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As loving ever endeth in sorrow after all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I cannot tell you plainiy what later may have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save that in bitter weeping were knights and ladies seen —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And noble liegemen also — for friends beloved laid low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story now is ended : this is the Niblungs' woe.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
