<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup><h2><span epub:type="label">Adventure</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span></h2><h3 epub:type="title">HOW SIEGFRIED WAS SENT TO WORMS</h3></hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they nine days had travel'd upon their homeward way,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Spake Hagen, lord of Tronje: " Now hark to what I say!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We yet have sent no tidings to Worms upon the Rhine:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Your heralds should be, surely, in Burgundy long syne."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>King Gunther made him answer: " Lo, what you say is right,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And for this errand, surely there is no better knight</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than you yourself, friend Hagen; so ride now to my land:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Our journey no one better can make them understand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Whereto made answer Hagen: " Small use should I be there!—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let me look to the cabin, whilst on the flood we fare:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>ril stay beside the women, and to their gear attend,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until we bring them safely into Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Bid Siegfried rather do it, and him your envoy make;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His mighty strength will aid him, the task to overtake.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should he decHne the going, you must, with kindliness.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For love of your fair sister, the journey on him press."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He sent to fetch the warrior, who came at his command.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Quoth Gunther: "Since we're nearing our home in mine own land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ought to send a message unto my sister dear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke unto my mother, that we the Rhine draw near.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"This ask I of thee, Siegfried j the favour grant, I pray,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I may ever thank thee," the warrior good did say.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Siegfried did withstand him,—he was so bold a man!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until King Gunther sorely to plead with him began.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"To ride thou shouldst be willing, for my sake," Gunther said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"And likewise for Kriemhilda's, the beautiful young maid \—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That we may owe thee service, the noble maid and I."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When Siegfried heard that saying he could no more deny.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Whate'er thou wilt command me, I cannot say thee nay!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For love of that fair maiden I'll do what thou dost say.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How could I aught deny her, who owns my heart alone?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For her sake that thou askest is all as good as done."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Go then and tell my mother, Ute, the noble queen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That we anent this journey in joyous mood have been;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And let the kings, my brothers, know each how we did fare;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all our friends must also the happy tidings hear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And from my beauteous sister, I pray thee naught reserve;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But say that I and Brunhild will her right gladly serve.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And tell unto the court-folk and all my serving-men,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That what my heart had yearn'd for, full well did I attain!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And tell to gallant Ortwein, that nephew dear of mine,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he have seats erected by Worms upon the Rhine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all my other kinsmen, they also should be told</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I, with Queen Brunhilda, high festival will hold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And tell unto my sister (as soon as she hath learn'd</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How, with my guests so shortly I shall be home return'd)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she to my betroth'd one a welcome good must give :—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So shall I to Kriemhilda for aye beholden live."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the noble Siegfried a courteous farewell</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Take of the Lady Brunhild, as did beseem him well,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And of her courtiers likewise; then to the Rhine rode he.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No m essenger were better in all the world than he.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With four and twenty horsemen he into Worms did ride.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Without the king he cometh! " was heard on every side;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And all the folk lamented, and stirr'd were with the dread</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest in that foreign country they'd left their master dead!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They from their steeds dismounted: right happy was their mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Giselher hastened to them, the youthful king and good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke his brother Gernot: how eagerly spake he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>When he the kingly Gunther did not with Siegfried see!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Be welcome, Siegfried," cried he, " but, pray you let me know</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where you have left my brother, who forth with you did go?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If Queen Brunhilda's prowess have robbed us of our king,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Methinks your high-aim'd wooing hath been an evil thing! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Forego your fears!" quoth Siegfried, " my noble comrade sends</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His loyal love and greeting to you and all his friends.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In rare good health I left him: I came at his command</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To bring you, as his envoy, tidings to this your land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"You must see to it quickly, however it may be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I the good queen-mother and your fair sister see;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For they must hear the message, which I was bade to tell,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From Gunther and Brunhilda: with both of whom 'tis well."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Giselher the lad said: " Go then to her you've won,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since for my sister's favour, such service you have done!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Great trouble doth she suffer about my brother's fate.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The maid will see you gladly, I'll warrant me of that!"</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The noble Siegfried answer'd: " An I can serve the maid,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right faithfully and gladly that service shall be paid.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now who will tell these ladies that them I fain would see? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Twas Giselher the comely his messenger would be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Swift Giselher the tidings unto his mother told,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And eke unto his sister, when he did them behold:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"To us the hero Siegfried of Netherland hath come;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Him hath my brother Gunther here to the Rhine sent home.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"He bringeth us full tidings of how the king doth fare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Now must ye give permission that he to court repair;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From Iceland brings he hither a true report, I trow."—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet soon these noble ladies much sorrow were to know.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To get their robes they hasten'd, and did themselves array;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And then they summon'd Siegfried to come to court straightway,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which did he, willing-hearted, too happy her to see:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble maid Kriemhilda spake to him graciously.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Be welcome, my lord Siegfried, thou worthy knight!" she cried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Where doth my brother Gunther, the noble king, abide?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of him, by Brunhild's prowess, I ween we are forlorn 1</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>O woe is me, poor maiden, that ever I was born! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the gallant hero: " Now pay me herald's fee I</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For know, O beauteous ladies, no need to weep have ye.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In lusty health I left him, of that ye may be sure;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To tell you both these tidings he sent me on before.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"They send to you their duty,—he and that bride of his,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With all true love and kindness, most noble queen; it is</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>High time to leave off weeping,—for they will soon be here! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For many a day she had not heard tidings half so dear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then with her snow-white kerchief she wiped her lovely eyes</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That were all wet with weeping; and in her gracious wise</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Began to thank the bearer for the good news he brought.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so her grief and sorrow were turn'd to pleasant thought.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She bade him to be seated, whereof right glad was he.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the lovesome maiden: " Rejoiced should I be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Could I for herald's guerdon give all my gold away!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Too rich for such meed are you,—I'll be your debtor aye."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Said he: " If for my portion I thirty kingdoms had,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I would, by your hands given, of any gift be glad! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Well! " said the gracious lady, " it shall be given to you."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her chamberlain was bidden to fetch the herald's due.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Full four-and-twenty buckles, set with bright stones and good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She gave him for his guerdon. And yet the hero's mood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Allowed him not to keep them;— he handed them around</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto her nearest ladies that in the room he found.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Her mother gave him greeting, in kind and courtly way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"I have yet more to tell you," the valiant man did say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Of what the king requireth when to the Rhine comes he;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If, lady, you will grant it, he'll aye beholden be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"The noble guests he bringeth—I heard him this desire—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He wishes you to welcome; and eke he doth require</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That you ride forth to meet him, outside Worms, on the strand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>This doth the king, at your hands, in all good faith demand."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the lovely lady: " Ready am I alway</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howe'er I can to serve him; I cannot say him nay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>All shall in loyal kindness, as he desires, be done."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whereat her cheek, for gladness, a heighten'd colour won.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>No prince's herald ever a better welcome had;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And had she dared to kiss him she would have been right glad.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How winsomely the gallant then from the dames withdrew!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As noble Siegfried counsel'd did the Burgundians do.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Sir Sindold and Sir Hunold, and eke Rumold the thane,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To whom the charge was given, must work with might and main</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To have the seats made ready, by Worms upon the sands,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw the royal stewards there working with their hands!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ortwein and Gere would not that aught be left undone.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They sent unto their kinsfolk on all sides, every one;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They told them of the wedding which was about to be.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The beauteous maids adorn'd them for the festivity.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The palace was made splendid, and deck'd was ev'ry wdl</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In honour of the guest-folk. King Gunther's royal hall</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Was all right well upholstered by many a foreign man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so this mighty wedding right merrily began.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then all along the highways throughout the countryside</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Were seen the three kings' kinsmen, who bidden were to ride</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And wait the guests' arrival, who soon were to appear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>While from the stores was taken abundance of rich gear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Erelong was spread the rumour that certain folk had seen</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Brunhilda's friends approaching; at which there did begin</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Great stir among the people in the Burgundian land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay me! what gallant warriors were seen on either hand!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake the fair Kriemhilda: " Ye maids attending me,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who would at this reception fain bear me company,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Go, seek from out my presses the richest robes and best:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That thereby praise and honour we gain from every guest."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors came shortly,—who ordered to be brought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The saddles nobly-fashioned, with finest gold inwrought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On which should ride the ladies, at Worms upon the Rhine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One never saw horse-trappings more fitting or more fine.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Ha! what a golden gleaming from these gay palfreys shone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And how the bridles sparkled with many a precious stone!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The footstools eke were golden, on carpets bright and good</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Placed for the ladies' mounting: right joyous was their mood.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The women's mares were saddled, and in the court did stay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For the young maids of honour,—as I erewhile did say.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Small saddle-bows and silken one saw these palfreys bear:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The finest silk, I warrant, of which you e'er could hear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then six-and-eighty matrons out of the palace went,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And on their heads were wimples. Towards Kriemhilda bent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Each beauteous dame her footsteps, in garments bright array'd;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And no less well apparell'd, came many a comely maid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In number four-and-fifty, damsels of Burgundy,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The best they were and fairest that ever eye could see;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw their flaxen tresses, with bands of riband bright.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What Gunther had desired was done with zeal aright.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The richest stuffs then wore they, the best one e'er could find,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Before the stranger- warriors; good clothes of many a kind,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So that each sev'ral beauty might have a setting fit.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whoso were discontented must be of little wit.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of sable and of ermine was many a costume there,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many an arm, and hand too, were made to seem more fair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With buckles and with bracelets on the silk stuffs they wore.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Should any try to tell you, his task would ne'er be o'er.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With many a fine- wrought girdle—so rich, and long, and gay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Hanging o'er shining raiment—the women's hands did play.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their skirts of Ferrandine were, and stuff of Araby.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Among those noble maidens was gladsomeness and glee.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In stomacher bejewell'd was many a maiden fair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Most winsomely enlaced. And sad indeed it were</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Did not her bright complexion outshine her dress in hue.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No other king had ever so fair a retinue.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As now those lovely ladies in full attire were seen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The knights who should escort them appear'd upon the scene.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>High-couraged warriors were they, of mighty strength and craft;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And each, beside his buckler, did bear an ashen shaft.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
