<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-27" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Adventure XXVII.— HOW THEY CAME TO BECHELAREN</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Away then went the margrave to where the ladies were,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His wife and eke their daughter;— to them the tidings fair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That had but now been brought him he told right speedily:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That soon their lady's brothers beneath their roof would be.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"My own and well-lov'd sweetheart," so Riideger then spake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"These noble kings and mighty we must right welcome make,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since they and all their followers are on their way to court.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And Hagen, Gunther's liegeman, thou must greet in good sort.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"With him there comes another, by name one Dankwart hight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And yet a third call'd Volker, a well-bred, courtly knight.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>These six must thou, Gotlinda, and thou, my daughter, kiss,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And let not any warrior a fitting welcome miss.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This promised both the ladies and did themselves prepare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And sought from out their coffers for raiment rich to wear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they to meet the warriors in fit attire might go.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Amidst the comely damsels there was a great to-do.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of painted women's faces one found there few enough.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They wore upon their foreheads bright bands of golden stuff,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Like costly chaplets fashion'd, that thus their lovely hair</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The wind should not dishevel: 'tis truth that I declare.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now let us leave the ladies in all this business.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Across the open country all eager was the press</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Riideger's retainers to where the princes stay'd;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Within the margrave's county right welcome were they made.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>As soon as towards him coming the margrave them espied,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How Riideger the valiant in words of gladness cried:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Be ye, my lords, right welcome, and likewise all your men;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How glad am I to see you here in my own domain! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In trust, with no misliking, the warriors to him bow'd;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That he all goodwill bore them to all he plainly show'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Apart he greeted Hagen, a friend of old was he;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And did the like to Volker, the knight of Burgundy.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Dankwart he also greeted; whereon that bold thane spake:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Since thou wilt give us shelter, pray, who shall undertake</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To cater for our people whom we have brought so far? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then answer'd him the margrave: " This night be free from care.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And as to all your people, and aught that in your band,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Horses be it, or raiment, hath come unto this land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So safely will I guard them and all from loss insure,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ye shall have no damage, nay, not by a single spur.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"So pitch your tents, ye yeomen, upon the open ground,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For any loss ye suffer I'm willing to be bound.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Take off the horses' bridles and let them freely run."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The like to them but seldom a host ere then had done.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Right glad of heart the guests were. When all had come to pass.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The lords rode off together. Then down upon the grass</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On all sides lay the yeomen, and right good rest they had;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween in all the journey they ne'er so softly laid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The noble margrave's lady without the castle gate</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Had gone with her fair daughter. One saw there with her wait</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A crowd of lovely women, and many a maiden fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who wore a store of armlets, and raiment rich and rare.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The precious gems glowed brightly, and might be seen afar</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon their rich apparel; so finely clad they were.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now the guests arriving dismounted speedily.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay me! what gallant breeding showed they of Burgundy!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Of maidens six-and-thirty and many another dame,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As ever eye could wish for so fair in form they came.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And went towards the strangers with many a gallant man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ah, then in sooth fair greetings of noble dames began!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then kiss'd the margrave's daughter the three kings fittingly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As also did her mother; Hagen was standing by,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her father bade her kiss him; she cast a look at him,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And fain had she not done it—she thought he look'd so grim.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Yet straightway must she do it, since so the master said;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her cheeks were changed in colour to mingled white and red.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Dankwart likewise kiss'd she, and then the Minstrel too;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By reason of his valour such greeting was his due.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The margrave's youthful daughter took presently the hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Giselher, the warrior from the Burgundian land:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Her mother, too, did likewise to Gunther, the brave king.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So went they with the heroes in gladness revelling.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The host along with Gernot went into a wide hall,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Where they were quickly seated, both knights and ladies all:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Good wine was call'd for straightway, which to the guests they gave.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay, surely never heroes could better treatment have.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With many an eager eye-glance the men look'd lovingly</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On Riideger's young daughter: she was so fair to see.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay, in his thoughts embraced her full many a warrior good,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And right well she deserved it; but she was proud of mood:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Think might they as it pleased them, such thing could not be done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And to and fro men's glances meanwhile oft lit upon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Right many a dame and maiden; plenty were seated there.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Goodwill the noble minstrel unto the host did bear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>According to the custom they sever'd then in two,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The warriors and the ladies to separate rooms withdrew.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In the wide hall the tables in order straight were set,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And soon the stranger guest-folk with royal service met.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To do her guests more honour the noble margravine</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sat down with them at table; her daughter was unseen,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Left with the younger children, where fittingly she sat;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The guests, who miss'd her presence, were sorely vext thereat</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When meat and drink abundant had been enjoy'd by all</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The ladies fair were usher'd again into the hall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>There lack'd not mirthful story, nor jesting manifold:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Busy of tongue was Volker, a knight of mood right bold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thus spake the noble minstrel, aloud that all might heed:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Most rich and noble margrave, God hath with you indeed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Dealt graciously, in granting so fair a dame for wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And likewise in bestowing on you a joyous life.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"If haply," said the minstrel, " I were a prince of blood,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And wore the crown of kingship, surely for wife I would</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Make choice of your fair daughter, for her my heart doth woo;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lovesome she is to look on and good and noble too."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then said to him the margrave: " How could it ever be,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That any king should ask for my daughter dear of me?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>We are but stranger-people, my wife as well as I:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What boots it that the damsel so fair is bodily? "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To him made answer Gernot, that man of breeding high:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"If I would have a sweetheart, my heart to satisfy,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So would I such a woman be ever glad to wed."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then Hagen put his word in, with kindly speech, and said:</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"'Tis still to be remember'd Lord Giselher should wed:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of ancestry so noble the margravine is bred.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That I and all his liegemen would serve her willingly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If with a crown upon her she came to Burgundy."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To Riideger this counsel in every way seem'd good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As likewise to Gotlinda: ay, both were glad of mood.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And soon the chiefs so order'd that she was bride beloved</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of Giselher the noble, as well a king behoved.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When aught is bound to happen who may the same gainsay?</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Forthwith they bade the damsel to court to take her way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They took an oath to give him the winsome maid to wife,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And he, on his side, promised to love her as his life.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>They gave the maiden warrant for castles and for land,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The noble king confirm'd it by oath and his right hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As likewise did Lord Gernot, that thus it should be done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then spake to them the margrave: " Though castles I have none,</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Yet you will I at all times in faithful friendship hold:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I give unto my daughter of silver and of gold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As much as five score horses may carry at their best,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That so well-pleased, in honour, the hero's kin may rest."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The pair were thereon bidden within a ring to stand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>According to the custom. Of many youths a band,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In mood for merry-making, stood opposite the twain.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And thought what they were minded, as youngsters still are fain.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When they began to question, and ask'd the winsome maid</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If she would have the warrior, she was a whit dismay'd:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And yet she still was minded to take the goodly wight;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>She blush'd but at the question, as any maiden might.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Riideger her father bade her to answer "Yea! "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That she would gladly take him. Whereon, without delay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His white hands stretch'd towards her to fold her lovingly,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Young Giselher came forward,—short though their joy must be!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Ye noble kings and mighty," thereon the margrave spake;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"When home again your journey to Burgundy ye take,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then I (as is the custom) will give my child to you.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That ye may take her with you." That they engaged to do.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Noisy as were the revels, at last they had an end.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The damsels to their chambers were bidden then to wend;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In sleep the guests, too, rested till daybreak did appear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then victuals were made ready; for all the host took care.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>AVhen they their fast had broken fain would they forward go</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Towards the Hunnish country. " I pray you, do not so,"</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Besought their host right noble; " awhile ye yet must stay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Since I no guests so welcome have seen for many a day."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To this made Dankwart answer: " That surely will not do.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whence will you get the victuals, the bread and wine thereto,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which for so many warriors you needs must have this day? "</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host, on hearing, answer'd: " It boots no more to say;</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"My well-Iov'd lords, so please ye, I will not be denied;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ay, for a fortnight will I the meat and drink provide</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For you and all the people that hither you have brought;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For never hath King Etzel from me yet taken aught."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Howe'er they sought to help it, needs must they there abide</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Until the fourth day's dawning: then did a thing betide,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Done of the master's bounty, and noised far and near:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On every guest bestow'd he a horse and wearing gear.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This could not last much longer: thence must they forward fare.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But Riideger the valiant could naught withhold or spare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To testify his bounty: what any fain would take,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That was denied to no one; all happy would he make.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then forth before the gateway their noble equerries</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Led out the saddled horses. In readiness for these</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The throng of foreign warriors came out; their shields in hand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>They bore, for they were eager to ride to Etzel's land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Thereon the master offer'd his gifts to one and all,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ere yet the royal strangers were come without the hall.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With bounty and great honour he knew the way to live;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And even his fair daughter to Giselher would give.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Anon he gave to Gunther, that hero of great fame,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>What he, the mighty monarch, might well wear without shame—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Though gifts he took but seldom—a coat of mail, to wit.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>O'er Riideger's hand did Gunther bow low in thanks for it.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then gave he unto Gernot a sword, a good one too.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Which afterwards in battle right gallantly he drew:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That such a gift he gave him well pleased the margrave's wife.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>'Twas doom'd to cost, soon after, good Riideger his life.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Gotlinda offer'd Hagen, as courteous custom bade,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Some tokens of her kindness, since such the king had had,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest he without her aidance should on his road be sped</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the royal revels; but this he soon gainsaid.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Of all the things that ever I saw," so Hagen spake,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Not one have I more envy hence as my own to take,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than yonder shield that hanging upon the wall I see:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That would I gladly carry to Etzel's land with me."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The margravine no sooner had heard what Hagen said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Than bygone woes were waken'd, and tears she needs must shed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Upon the death of Nudung she sorrowfully thought,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How Witege had slain him; thus grief upon her wrought.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>She spake unto the warrior: " I'll give the shield to thee.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>But would to God in Heaven that still ahve were he</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who on his arm once bare it! In fight he was laid low,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And I must aye bewail him: hence comes, poor me, my woe! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then from her seat uprose she, the noble margravine;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And so, the buckler grasping her snow-white hands between,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The dame to Hagen bore it, and he thereof took hold:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It was a gift of honour unto that warrior bold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>A case of polish'd leather upon its surface lay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A better shield and brighter ne'er shone in light of day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With noble gems bestudded; had any wanted it</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To buy, perchance its value a thousand marks had quit.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then, by command of Hagen, they bore the shield away.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And now to court did Dankwart begin to wend his way.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On him the margrave's daughter apparel rich bestow'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In which ere long in Hunsland right gloriously he rode.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now all these friendly tokens they were endow'd withal.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Into the hands of any had never come at all,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Save by the master's bounty, offer'd with such good will.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such foes ere long became they that him they needs must kill!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the ready Volker, his fiddle in his hand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With courtly mien approaching before Gotlinda stand.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sweet tunes for her he fiddled, and sang his roundelay,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Thus would he from Bechlaren take leave to ride away.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The margravine then bade men to her a chest to bear;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of kindly gifts and bounty ye now again must hear.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefrom she took twelve armlets and put them o'er his hand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"These must you carry with you away to Etzel's land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"And for my sake must wear them whene'er you go to court;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That when you come back hither I may have good report</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How you have done me service at that great festival."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>E'en as the lady bade him he well accomplish'd all.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The host said to the strangers: " Ye will the better fare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>If I myself shall lead you, and bid you how beware</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lest anyone should do you a hurt upon the road."</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then of his sumpter-horses each quickly had its load.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>There stood the host all ready, and eke five hundred men</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>With horses and apparel. These led he with him then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto the royal wedding,—a joyous merry train;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alive to Bechelaren not one came back again!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>With many loving kisses the host his farewells said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As Giselher did also, by honour ever led.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The women fair they fondled with arms around them thrown;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For which would many a damsel be weeping soon, alone.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>On all sides were the windows thrown open to the air.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host with his retainers to mount all eager were.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>I ween their hearts foreboded the mighty ills to be;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For many dames were weeping and maidens fair to see.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>For dear friends left behind them, plenty at heart were sore,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whom they at Bechelaren would look on nevermore;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Yet gaily rode they onwards, and down across the sand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Along the Danube river, unto the Hunnish land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then Riideger the noble, well versed in chivalry,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Spake unto the Burgundians: " We ought not, verily,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To hide that we are coming unto the Hunfolk near;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such good news hath King Etzel ne'er had the chance to hear;</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Down through the Austrian kingdom the messenger rode fast;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Soon to the folk on all sides from mouth to mouth it pass'd.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That coming were the heroes from Worms beyond the Rhine.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>No tidings the king's lieges could more to joy incline.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The messengers sped forwards and now the tidings bare</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of how the Niblung warriors within the Huns' land were.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"Thou shouldst right well receive them, Kriemhilda, lad mine;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To thee come in great honour these brothers dear of thine."</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Meanwhile, as dame Kriemhilda beside a window-sill</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Stood watching for her kinsmen,—as friends for others will,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Lo, from her father's country there saw she many a man.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The king, who heard the tidings, to laugh for glee began.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>"Now joy of all who love me be mine! " Kriemhilda said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>"For hither come my kinsmen with many a shield new-made,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a bright steel hauberk. Who would have gold of me.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Let him my wrongs remember, my friend he e'er shall be! "</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
