<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventure 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventure-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup><h2><span epub:type="label">Adventure</span> <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span></h2><h3 epub:type="title">SIEGFRIED</h3></hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In Netherland was growing</span><span>a rich king's son and heir.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Whose father's name was Siegmund,</span><span>Sieglind his mother fair.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In a strong castle lived they,</span><span>of far and widespread fame,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Beside the great Rhine river;</span><span>and Santen was its name.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>This prince's name was Siegfried,</span><span>a gallant knight and good.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In many kingdoms proved he</span><span>his brave and warlike mood;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So great his strength of body,</span><span>he rode from land to land.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Ha! what fine warriors found he</span><span>on the Burgundian strand!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>In his best days of prowess,</span><span>when he was young and slim,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many a wondrous story</span><span>the country told of him,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How noble was his stature,</span><span>how fair he was to see,—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a comely woman</span><span>look'd on him lovingly.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>He had a careful rearing,</span><span>as did his birth befit.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>His virtues were his own, though,</span><span>and nowise due to it I</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his father's country</span><span>he was an ornament,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For men in all things found him</span><span>to be right excellent.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Now was he grown so manly</span><span>that he to court must ride;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The men-folk saw him gladly;</span><span>and dames and maids beside</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Wished that his will might bring him,</span><span>not once, but ever there;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many bore him favour,</span><span>as well the knight was ware!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>To ride forth unattended</span><span>the boy was ne'er allowed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>In costly raiment decked him</span><span>Siegmund and Sieglind proud;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And the wise elders taught him</span><span>(as well they understood),</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>How best to win the people,</span><span>and rule the land for good.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And being now so stalwart</span><span>that he could weapons bear,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Having what he required,</span><span>enough and e'en to spare,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He turned his thoughts to women,</span><span>and dreamt of a fair bride:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The fairest might stand proudly</span><span>at the bold Siegfried's side.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did his father, Siegmund,</span><span>summon his Hegemen all</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto a friendly banquet</span><span>in the great castle-hall;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To many a neighbour-king's land</span><span>the festal tidings spread;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>On strangers as on kinsmen</span><span>steeds, gear, he lavished.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>If any squire were lacking</span><span>knightly estate and name,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who, by descent and breeding,</span><span>had thereunto a claim,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such noble youth was bidden</span><span>to tournament and board.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And with the young king, later,</span><span>was girt with knightly sword.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>One could tell many marvels</span><span>of this great feast so rare;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Siegmund and Siegelinda</span><span>did win much honour there</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>By the good gifts they lavished,</span><span>with free and open hand;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Therefore so many strangers</span><span>came riding to their land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Four hundred squires received</span><span>their knightly gear that day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Together with young Siegfried;</span><span>and maidens fair, they say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Toiled at the festal raiment,</span><span>because they did him hold</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So dear, and many a jewel</span><span>they broidered in the gold.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And wove them in the robe-weft,</span><span>and stitched upon the hem:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Sure, to such proud young warriors</span><span>behoved lace and gem!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The host had seats prepared</span><span>for many a gallant man,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At that June feast, where Siegfried</span><span>his knightly course began.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And thither to the Minster</span><span>came many a wealthy squire,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And many a noble warrior.</span><span>The elders did aspire</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That day to serve the younger,</span><span>as was the ancient rule ;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And merriment, and pastime,</span><span>and joy were at the full.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>When later, in God's honour,</span><span>a solemn Mass was sung,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Up rose from out the people</span><span>a great and mighty throng,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who there received knighthood,</span><span>with fitting knightly rite.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And honours, such as ne'ermore</span><span>were seen of mortal wight.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Soon ran the knights to where they</span><span>found saddled chargers wait;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>At Siegmund's court began then</span><span>a tournament so great</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That one heard hall and palace</span><span>with crash of arms resound,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As the high-mettled thanes met</span><span>upon the tilting-ground.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>From old knights and from young ones</span><span>went thrust and parry there,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Till crash of breaking lances</span><span>re-echoed through the air;—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>One saw the splinters flying</span><span>up to the palace wall</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From many a gallant knight's hand:</span><span>so eager were they all!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>The host he bade them end it;</span><span>they led the steeds away;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Full many a sturdy buckler</span><span>to sight all broken lay;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And precious stones, in plenty,</span><span>had fallen on the sward</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>From out the shining shield-clasps:</span><span>the onset was so hard.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then went the host's guests whither</span><span>they bidden were to sit;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Their weariness was banished</span><span>by the choice food they ate,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And by wine of the rarest,</span><span>of which there was no stint.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Alike to friends and strangers</span><span>was all this lavishment.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>And, though the games and pastimes</span><span>had lasted all the day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>The throngs of merrymakers</span><span>knew neither rest nor stay.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Contending for the many</span><span>good gifts that were to hand:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>A bounty which redounded</span><span>to the praise of Siegmund's land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the king make over</span><span>to young Siegfried, the loan</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Of both his lands and castles,</span><span>as he afore had done.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Unto his knightly comrades</span><span>he gave with open hand,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>So all were right well-pleased</span><span>that they had sought his land.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Until the seventh sunrise</span><span>the festival went on.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Then did the rich queen, Sieglind,</span><span>as in old days was done,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>For love of her son Siegfried,</span><span>share out her red gold free:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>To win all folks' hearts to him</span><span>thereby, in sooth, hoped she.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>Not one who in the games played,</span><span>methinks, went poor away;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>It rained steeds and raiment</span><span>through all the land that day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>As if had come the world's end,</span><span>and common life were o'er!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Such gifts, in such abundance,</span><span>were never known before;</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>So, with befitting honour,</span><span>ended the festal day.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>And some of the rich nobles</span><span>were overheard to say,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>That they would like the young man,</span><span>Prince Siegfried, fortheir lord;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Howbeit the honest Siegfried,</span><span>gave heed not to their word.</span>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>While Siegmund and Sieglinda</span><span>were living, their dear son</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Would never dream of wearing</span><span>the crown for any one!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>He wished to be lord only</span><span>the mighty to restrain,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<span>Who kept the land in terror,—</span><span>the bold and gallant thane!</span>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
